The Project Gutenberg EBook of My Day, by Sara Rice Pryor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: My Day
       Reminiscences of a Long Life

Author: Sara Rice Pryor

Release Date: June 11, 2018 [EBook #57306]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MY DAY ***




Produced by Melissa McDaniel and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Transcriber's Note:

  Inconsistent hyphenation and spelling in the original document have
  been preserved. Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  The following variant spellings were found by readers and retained:

    mits should possibly be mitts
    Courtland and Cortlandt
    ante-bellum and antebellum
    practise and practice
    McIlwane and McIlwaine
    gray and grey
    Bremer and Brémer




MY DAY

REMINISCENCES OF A LONG LIFE




     THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
     NEW YORK · BOSTON · CHICAGO
     ATLANTA · SAN FRANCISCO

     MACMILLAN & CO., LIMITED
     LONDON · BOMBAY · CALCUTTA
     MELBOURNE

     THE MACMILLAN CO. OF CANADA, LTD.
     TORONTO




  [Illustration: MRS. ROGER A. PRYOR.]




     MY DAY

     REMINISCENCES OF A LONG
     LIFE

     BY
     MRS. ROGER A. PRYOR

     AUTHOR OF "REMINISCENCES OF PEACE AND WAR,"
     "THE MOTHER OF WASHINGTON AND HER
     TIMES," ETC.

     ILLUSTRATED

     NEW YORK
     THE MACMILLAN COMPANY

     1909

     _All rights reserved_




     COPYRIGHT, 1909,
     BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.

     Set up and electrotyped. Published October, 1909.


     Norwood Press
     J. S. Cushing Co.—Berwick & Smith Co.
     Norwood, Mass., U.S.A.




     To the Memory of
     My Son
     Theodorick Bland Pryor




     _I stood at dawn by a limitless sea
       And watched the rose creep over the gray;
     Till the heavens were a glowing canopy!
       This was my day!_

     _The pale stars stole away, one by one—
       Like sensitive souls from the presence of Pride:
     The moon hung low, looking back, as the sun
       Rose over the tide._

     _And he, like a King, came up from the Sea!
       He opened my rose—unfettered my song—
     And quickened a heart to be true to me
       All the day long._

     _The soul that was born of a song and flower
       Of tender dawn-flush, and shadowy gray,
     Was strengthened by Love for a bitter hour
       That chilled my day._

     _I had dwelt in the garden of the Lord!
       I had gathered the sweets of a summer day:
     I was called to stand where a flaming sword
       Turned every way._

     _It spared not the weak—nor the strong—nor the dear;
       And following fast, like a phantom band,
     Famine and Fever and shuddering Fear
       Swept o'er the land._

     _They whispered that Hope, the angel of light,
       Would spread her white wings and speed her away;
     But she folded me close in my longest night
        And darkest day._

     _As of old, when the fire and tempest had passed,
       And an earthquake had riven the rocks, the Word
     In a still small voice rose over the blast—
       The Voice of the Lord._

     _And the Voice said: "Take up your lives again!
       Quit yourselves manfully! Stand in your lot!
     Let the Famine, the Fever, the Peril, the Pain,
       Be all forgot!_

     _"Weep no more for the lovely, the brave,
       The young head pillowed on a blood-stained sod;
     The daisy that grows on the soldier's grave
       Looks up to God!_

     _"The soul of the patriot-soldier stands
       With a mighty host in eternal calm,
     And He who pressed the sword to his hands
       Has given the Palm."_

            *       *       *       *       *

     _And now I stand with my face to the west,
       Shading mine eyes, for my glorious sun
     Is splendid again as he sinks to his rest—
       His day is done._

     _I have lost my rose, forgotten my song,
       But the true heart that loved me is mine alway;
     The stars are alight—the way not long—
       I had my day!_

_November 8, 1908._




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


     Mrs. Roger A. Pryor. From a Photograph, 1900      _Frontispiece_

                                                        FACING PAGE

     Residence of Dr. S. P. Hargrave                             43

     Mrs. Fanny Bland Randolph                                   71

     University of Virginia                                      75

     Stephen A. Douglas                                          85

     William Walker                                             121

     Washington in 1845                                         138

     General Robert E. Lee in 1861                              208

     Theodorick Bland Pryor                                     344

     William Rice Pryor                                         348

     Charlotte Cushman                                          359

     Helena Modjeska                                            362

     General Hancock                                            371

     General Sheridan                                           377

     Mrs. Vincenzo Botta                                        403

     Judge Roger A. Pryor in 1900                               447




MY DAY




CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTORY


I am constrained to encourage a possible reader by assuring him that I
have no intention whatever of writing strictly an autobiography. Nothing
in myself nor in my life would warrant me in so doing.

I might, perhaps, except the story of the Civil War, and my part in the
trials and sorrows of my fellow-women, but this story I have fully and
truly told in my "Reminiscences of Peace and War."

My countrymen were so kind to these first stories that I feel I may
claim some credentials as a "babbler of Reminiscences." Besides, I have
lived in the last two-thirds of the splendid nineteenth century, and
have known some of the men and women who made that century notable. And
I would fain believe with Mr. Trollope that "the small records of an
unimportant individual life, the memories which happen to linger in the
brain of the old like bits of drift-wood floating round and round in
the eddies of a back-water, can more vividly than anything else bring
before the young of the present generation those ways of acting and
thinking and talking in the everyday affairs of life which indicate the
differences between themselves and their grandfathers."

But I shall have more than this "floating driftwood" to reward the
reader who will follow me to the end of my story!

Writers of Reminiscences are interested—perhaps more interested than
their readers—in recalling their earliest sensations, and through them
determining at what age they had "found themselves"; _i.e._ become
conscious of their own personality and relation to the world they had
entered.

Long before this time the child has seen and learned more perhaps than
he ever learned afterwards in the same length of time. He has acquired
knowledge of a language sufficient for his needs. His miniature world
has been, in many respects, a foreshadowing of the world he will know
in his maturity. He has learned that he is a citizen of a country with
laws,—some of which it will be prudent to obey,—such as the law against
taking unpermitted liberties with the cat, or touching the flame of
the candle; while other laws may be evaded by cleverness and discreet
behavior. He finds around him many things; pictures on walls, for
instance, that may be admired but never touched,—other lovely things
that may be handled and even kissed, but must be returned to mantels
and tables,—and yet others, not near as delightful as these, "poor
things but his own," to be caressed or beaten, or even broken at his
pleasure. He has learned to indulge his natural taste for the drama. His
nurse covers her head with a paper and becomes the dreadful, groaning
villain behind it, while the baby girds himself for attack, tears the
disguise from the villain, and shouts his victory. As he learns the
names and peculiarities of animals, the scope of the drama widens. He is
a spirited horse, snorting and charging along, or—if his picture-books
have been favorable—a roaring lion from whom the nurse flees in terror.
Of the domestic play there is infinite variety—nursing in sickness, the
doctor, baby-tending, cooking,—and once, alas! I heard a baby girl of
eighteen months enact a fearful quarrel between man and wife, ending
firmly "I leave you! I never come back!"

These natural tendencies of children would seem to prove that the soul
or mind of man can be "fetched up from the cradle"—a phrase for which
I am indebted to one of my contemporaries, Mr. Leigh Hunt, who in turn
quoted it as a popular phrase in his late (and my early) day. But with
the single exception of the spoken language all these childish plays
have been successfully taught to our humble brothers; to our poor
relation the monkey, the dog, elephant, seal, canary bird—even to fleas.
All these are capable of enacting a short drama. The elephant, longing
for his bottle, never rings his bell too soon. The dog remembers his
cue, watches for it, and never anticipates it. The seal, more wonderful
than all, born as he has been without arms or legs, mounts a horse for
a ride, and waits for his umbrella to be poised on his stubby nose.
Even the creature whose name is a synonym for vulgar stupidity has been
taught to indicate with porcine finger the letters which spell that
name.

With these and other animals we hold in common our faculty of imitation,
our memory, affection, antipathy, revenge, gratitude, passionate
adoration of one special friend, and even the perception of music—the
infant will weep and the poodle howl in response to the same strain
in a minor key—and yet, notwithstanding this common lot, this common
inheritance, there is born for us and not for them a moment when some
strange unseen power breathes into us something akin to consciousness
of a living soul.

Having no past as a standard for the reasonable and natural, nothing
surprises children. They are simply witnesses of a panorama in the
moving scenes of which they have no part. When I was three years old,
I visited my grandfather in Charlotte County. The Staunton River wound
around his plantation and I was often taken out rowing with my aunts.
One day the canoe tipped and my pretty Aunt Elizabeth fell overboard.
Without the slightest emotion I saw her fall, and saw her recovered.
For aught I knew to the contrary it was usual and altogether proper
for young ladies to fall in rivers and be fished out by their long
hair. But another event, quite ordinary, overwhelmed me with the most
passionate distress. Having, a short time before, advanced a tentative
finger for an experimental taste of an apple roasting for me at my
grandfather's fire, I was prepared to be shocked at seeing a colony of
ants rush madly about upon wood a servant was laying over the coals.
My cries of distress arrested my grandfather as he passed through the
room. He quickly ordered the sticks to be taken off, and calling me
to a seat in front of him, said gravely: "We will try these creatures
and see if they deserve punishment. Evidently they have invaded our
country. The question is, did they come of their own accord, or were
they while enjoying their rights of life and liberty, captured by us
and brought hither against their will?" My testimony was gravely taken.
I was quite positive I had seen the sticks, swarming with ants, laid
upon the fire. "Uncle Peter," who had brought in the wood, was summoned
and sharply cross-questioned. Nothing could shake him. To the best
of his knowledge and belief, "them ants nuvver come 'thouten they was
'bleeged to," and so, as they were by this time wildly scampering over
the floor, they were gently admonished by a persuasive broom to leave
the premises. Uncle Peter was positive they would find their way home
without difficulty, and I was comforted.

I remember this little incident perfectly; I can see my dear
grandfather, his white hair tied with a black ribbon _en queue_,
advancing his stick like a staff of office. I claim that then and
there—three years old—I found myself, "fetched up my soul" from
somewhere, almost "from the cradle," inasmuch as I had pitied
the unfortunate, unselfishly espoused his cause, and won for him
consideration and justice.

Writers of fiction are supposed to present, as in a mirror, the truth
as it is found in nature. They are fond of hinting that at some moment
in the early life of every individual something occurs which foreshadows
his fate, something which if interpreted—like the dreams of the ancient
Hebrews—would tell us without the aid of gypsy, medium, or clairvoyant
the things we so ardently desire to know. In Daniel Deronda, Gwendolyn,
in her moment of triumph, touches a spring in a panel, which, sliding
back, reveals a picture,—the upturned face of a drowning man. In Lewis
Rand, Jacqueline, the bride of half an hour, hears the story of a
duel—and the pistol-shot echoes ever after through her brain, filling
it with insistent foreboding.

We might recall illustrations of similar foreshadowing in real life. For
instance, Jean Carlyle, six years old, beautiful and vivid as a tropical
bird, stands before an audience to sing her little song; and waits in
vain for her accompanist. Finally she throws her apron over her head and
runs away in confusion. _She_ was prepared, she knew her part; but the
support was lacking, the accompaniment failed her. It was not given to
him who told the story to perceive the prophecy!

Were I fanciful enough to fix upon one moment as prophetic of my life—as
a key-note to the controlling principle of that life—I might recall the
incident in my grandfather's room, when I ceased to be merely an inert
absorber of light and warmth and comfort, and became aware of the _pain_
in the world—pain which I passionately longed to alleviate.




CHAPTER II


I had a childless aunt, who annually came up from her home in Hanover to
spend part of the summer with my parents and my grandfather. She begged
me of my mother for a visit, meant to be a brief one, and as she was
greatly loved and respected by her people, I was permitted to return
with her.

There were no railroads in Virginia at that time. All journeys were made
in private conveyances. The great coach-and-four had disappeared after
the Revolution. The carriage and pair, with the goatskin hair trunk
strapped on behind, or—in case the journey were long—a light wagon for
baggage, were now enough for the migratory Virginian.

He lived at home except for the three summer months, when it was his
invariable rule to visit Saratoga, or the White Sulphur, Warm, and Sweet
Springs, of Virginia, making a journey to the latter, in something less
than a week, now accomplished from New York in eight or nine hours.

The carriage on high springs creaked and rocked like a ship at sea.
Fortunately, it was well cushioned and padded within—and furnished at
the four corners with broad double straps through which the arms of
the passenger could be thrust to steady himself withal. He needed them
in the pitching and jolting over the rocks and ruts of dreadful roads.
Inside each door were ample pockets for sundry comforts—biscuits,
sandwiches, apples, restorative medicines and cordials, books and
papers. A flight of three or four carpeted steps was folded inside the
door. Twenty-five miles were considered "a day's journey," quite enough
for any pair of horses. At noon the latter were rested under the shade
of trees near some spring or clear brook, the carriage cushions were
laid out, and the luncheon! Well, I cannot presume to be greater than
the greatest of all our American artists,—he who could mould a hero in
bronze and make him live again; and hold us, silent and awed, in the
presence of the mysterious and unspeakable grief of a woman in marble!
Has he not confessed that although he remembers an early perception of
beauty in sky and sea, and field and wood—the memory that has followed
him vividly through life is of odors from a baker's oven, and from
apples stewing in a German neighbor's kitchen? Hot gingerbread and
spiced, sugared apples! I should say so, indeed!

In just such a carriage as I have described, I set forth with my strange
aunt and uncle—a little three-and-a-half-year-old! At night we slept in
some country tavern, surrounded by whispering aspen trees. A sign in
front, swung like a gibbet, promised "Refreshment for man and beast."
Invariably the landlord, grizzled, portly, and solemn, was lying at
length on a bench in his porch or lounging in a "split-bottom chair"
with his feet on the railing. He had seen our coming from afar. He
was eager for custom, but he had dignity to maintain. Lifting himself
slowly from his bench or chair, he would leisurely come forward, and
hesitatingly "reckon" he could accommodate us. I was mortally afraid of
him! Sinking into one of his deep feather beds, I trembled for my life
and wept for my mother.

Finally one night, wearied out with the long journey, we turned into
an avenue of cedars and neared our home. My aunt and uncle, on the
cushions of the back seat, little dreamed of the dire resolve of the
small rebel in front. Like the ants, I had been brought, against my
will, to a strange country. I silently determined I would not be a good
little girl. I would be as naughty as I could, give all the trouble I
could, and force them to send me home again. But with the morning sun
came perfect contentment, which soon blossomed into perfect happiness.
From my bed I ran out in my bare feet to a lovely veranda shaded by
roses. On one of the latticed bars a little wren bobbed his head in
greeting, and poured out his silver thread of a song. Gabriella, the
great tortoise-shell cat, with high uplifted tail, wooed and won me;
and when Milly, black and smiling, captured me, it was to introduce me
to an adorable doll and a little rocking-chair.

From that hour until I married I was the happy queen of the household,
the one whose highest good was wisely considered and for whose happiness
all the rest lived.

The bond between my aunt and her small niece could never be sundered,
and as she was greatly loved and trusted, and as many children blessed
my own dear mother, I was practically adopted as the only child of my
aunt and uncle, Dr. and Mrs. Samuel Pleasants Hargrave.




CHAPTER III


The general impression I retain of the world of my childhood is
of gardens—gardens everywhere; abloom with roses, lilies, violets,
jonquils, flowering almond-trees which never fruited, double-flowering
peach trees which also bore no fruit, but were, with the almond trees,
cherished for the beauty of their blossoms. And conservatories! These
began deep in the earth and were built two stories high at the back of
the house. They were entered by steps going down and only thus were they
entered. Windows opened into them from the parlor (always "parlor,"—not
drawing-room) or from my lady's chamber. On the floor were great tubs
of orange and lemon trees and the gorgeous flowering pomegranate. Along
the walls were shelves reached by short ladders, and on these shelves
were ranged cacti, gardenias (Cape Jessamine, or jasmine, as we knew
this queen of flowers), abutilon, golden globes of lantana, and the
much-prized snowy Camellia Japonica, sure to sent packed in cotton as
gifts to adorn the dusky tresses of some Virginia beauty, or clasp the
folds of her diaphanous kerchief. These camellias, long before they were
immortalized by the younger Dumas, were reckoned the most poetic and
elegant of all flowers—so pure and sensitive, resenting the profanation
of the slightest touch. No cavalier of that day would present to his
ladye faire the simple flowers we love to-day. These would come fast
enough with the melting of the snows early in February.

I have never forgotten the ecstasy of one of these early February
mornings. Mittened and hooded I ran down the garden walk from which the
snow had been swept and piled high on either side. Delicious little
rivers were running down and I launched a mighty fleet of leaves
and sticks. Suddenly I beheld a miracle. The snow was lying thickly
all around, but the sun had melted it from a south bank, and white
violets—hundreds of them—had popped out. I spread my apron on the clean
snow and filled it with the cool, crisp blossoms. Running in exultant
I poured my treasure into my dear aunt's lap as she sat on a low chair
which brought my head just on a level with her bosom. Ah! Like St.
Gaudens, I remember the gingerbread and apples!—but I remember the
violets also!

I can see myself in the early hot summer, sent forth to breathe the
cool air of the morning. What a paradise of sweets met my senses!
The squares, crescents, and circles edged with box, over which an
enchanted glistening veil had been thrown during the night; the tall
lilacs, snowballs, myrtles, and syringas, guarding like sentinels
the entrance to every avenue; the glowing beds of tulips, pinks,
purple iris, "bleeding hearts," flowering almond with rosy spikes,
lily-of-the-valley! I scanned them all with curious eyes. Did I not
know that the fairies, riding on butterflies, had visited each one and
painted it during the night? Did I not know that these same fairies
had hung their cups on the grass, and danced so long that the cups grew
fast to the blades of grass and became lilies-of-the-valley? I knew all
this—although my dear aunt never approved of fairy tales and gave me
no fairy-tale books. Cousin Charles believed them; moreover, I had a
charming picture of a fairy, riding on a butterfly. Of course they were
true.

But I always hurried along, with small delay, among the flower beds. I
knew where the passion-vine had dropped golden globes of fruit during
the night—and I knew well where the cool figs, rimy with the early
dew, were bursting with scarlet sweetness. Tell me not of your acrid
grape-fruit, or far-fetched orange, wherewithal to break the morning
fast! I know of something better. Alas! neither you nor I can ever
again—except in fancy—cool our lips with the dew-washed fruits of an
"old Virginia" garden.

It seems to me that the life we led at Cedar Grove and Shrubbery
Hill was busy beyond all parallel. Everything the family and the
plantation needed was manufactured at home, except the fine fabrics,
the perfumes, wines, etc., which were brought from Richmond, Baltimore,
or Philadelphia. Everything, from the goose-quill pen to carpets,
bedspreads, coarse cotton cloth, and linsey-woolsey for servants'
clothing, was made at home. Even corset-laces were braided of cotton
threads, the corset itself of home manufacture.

Miss Betsey, the housekeeper, was the busiest of women. Besides her
everlasting pickling, preserving, and cake-baking, she was engaged, with
my aunt, in mysterious incantations over cordials, tonics, camomile,
wild cherry, bitter bark, and "vinegar of the four thieves," to be used
in sickness.

The recipe for the latter—well known in Virginia households a century
ago—was probably brought by Thomas Jefferson from France in 1794.
He was a painstaking collector of everything of practical value. To
this day there exists in the French druggists' code a recipe known as
the "Vinaigre des Quatre Voleurs"; and it is that given by condemned
malefactors who, according to official records still existing in France,
entered deserted houses in the city of Marseilles during a yellow fever
epidemic in the seventeenth century and carried off immense quantities
of plunder. They seemed to possess some method of preserving themselves
from the scourge. Being finally arrested and condemned to be burned
to death, an offer was made to change the method of inflicting their
punishment if they would reveal their secret. The condemned men then
confessed that they always wore over their faces handkerchiefs that
had been saturated in strong vinegar and impregnated with certain
ingredients, the principal one being bruised garlic.

The recipe, still preserved in the Randolph family of Virginia, is an
odd one—with a homely flavor—hardly to be expected of a French formula.
It requires simply "lavender, rosemary, sage, wormwood, rue and mint,
of each a large handful; put them in a pot of earthenware, cover the
pot closely, and put a board on the top; keep it in the hottest sun two
weeks, then strain and bottle it, putting in each a clove of garlic.
When it has settled in the bottle and becomes clear, pour it off gently;
do this until you get it all free from sediment. The proper time to make
it is when herbs are in full vigor, in June."

Only a housewife, who lived in an age of abundant leisure, could afford
to interest herself for two weeks in the preparation of a bottle of the
"Vinegar of the Four Thieves." The housekeeper of to-day can steep her
herbs, then strain them through one of the fine sieves in her pantry,
the whole operation costing little labor and time, with perhaps as good
results. If she is inclined to make the experiment, she will achieve
a decoction which has the merit at least of romance, the secret of
its combination having been purchased by sparing the lives of four
distinguished Frenchmen, with the present practical value of providing
a refreshing prophylactic for the sick room,—provided the lavender,
rosemary, sage, wormwood, rue, and mint completely stifle the clove of
garlic!

Pepper and spices were pounded in marble mortars. Sugar was purchased
in the bulk—in large cones wrapped in thick blue paper. This was broken
into great slices, and then subdivided into cubes by means of a knife
and hammer.

Sometimes a late winter storm would overtake the new-born lambs,
and they would be found forsaken by the flock. The little shivering
creatures would be brought to a shelter, and fed with warm milk from
the long bottles, in which even now we get Farina Cologne. Soft linen
was wrapped around the slender neck, and my dear aunt fed the nurslings
with her own white hands. How the lambkins could wag their tiny tails!
and how they grew and prospered!

All the fine muslins of the family, my aunt's great collars, and the
ruffles worn by my uncle, my Cousin Charles, and myself, were carefully
laundered under my aunt's supervision. Dipped in pearly starch, they
were "clapped dry" in our own hands, ironed with small irons, and
beautifully crimped on a board with a penknife. Fine linen was a kind
of hall-mark by which a gentleman was "known in the gates when he" sat
"among the elders of the land."

I was intensely interested in all this busy life—and always eager to be
a part of it.

There was nothing I had not attempted before I rounded my first
decade,—churning, printing the butter with wooden moulds, or shaping
it into a bristling pineapple; spinning on tiptoe at the great wheel—we
had no flax-wheels—and even once scrambling up to the high seat of the
weaver and sending the shuttle into hopeless tangles. "Ladies don't
nuvver do dem things" sternly rebuked Milly. "Lemme ketch you ergin
at dat business, an' 'twont be wuf while for Marse Chawles to baig for
you."

The inconsistencies as to proprieties puzzled me then and have puzzled
me ever since.

"Why mustn't I spin and churn, Milly?" I insisted.

"Ain't I done tole you? Ladies don't nuvver do dem things."

"Then why can I help with the laces and muslins?"

"Cause—ladies _does_ do dem things."

And so I became an expert _blanchisseuse de fin_, as it was the one
household industry allowed my caste.

There was no railroad to bring us luxuries from the nearest
town—Richmond—twenty-five miles distant, and we depended upon the little
covered cart of Aunt Mary Miller. Aunt Mary and her husband, Uncle
Jacob, were old family servants who had been given their freedom. They
lived at the foot of a hill near our house, and down the path, slippery
with fallen pine needles, I was often sent with Milly to summon Uncle
Jacob, who was the coachman. He was very old, and gray, and always
unwilling to "hitch up de new kerridge in dis bad weather." He would
stand on the lawn and scan the horizon in every direction—and a dim,
distant haze was enough to daunt him. Aunt Mary was allowed to collect
eggs, poultry, and peacock's feathers from the neighbors, take them down
to Richmond to her waiting customers, and return with sundry delightful
things,—Peter Parley's books, a wax doll, oranges and candy for me, and
wonderful stories of the splendors she had seen. She had other stories
than these. One night "a hant" had walked around her cart and "skeered"
her old horse "pretty nigh outen his senses"; as to herself, "Humph,
I'se used to hants."

"_Where_, Aunt Mary, tell me," I begged. With a furtive glance lest my
elders would hear, she answered:—

"I ain't sayin' nothin'. Don't you go an' say _I_ tole you anythin'.
Jes you run down to the back of the gyardin as fur as the weepin' willer
an' you'll know."

Of course I knew already what I should find beneath the willow. I
had often stood at the foot of the two long white slabs and read:
"Sacred to the Memory of Charles Crenshaw" and "Sacred to the Memory of
Susannah Crenshaw." I knew their story. This had been their home. The
brother had died early, and for love of him the sister had broken her
heart. My sweet great-aunt Susannah! Had she not left a lovely Chinese
basket—which I was to inherit—full of curious and precious things; a
carved ivory fan, necklace, pearls, and amethysts, and a treasure of
musk-scented yellow lace? Aunt Mary shook her head when I announced
scornfully that I wasn't afraid of my Aunt Susannah.

"I ain't talkin'! Miss Susannah used to war blue satin high-heeled
slippers. You jes listen! Some o' dese dark nights you'll hear sump'n
goin' '_click, click_.'"

"I know, Aunt Mary. That's the death-head moth. Milly says it won't hurt
anybody, without you meddle with it."

"Humph! _Milly!_ I seed hants befo' her mammy was bawn! _I_ tells you
it's Miss Susannah comin' on her high heels to see if you meddlin' with
her things. I knowed Miss Susannah! she was monsous particlar. She ain't
nuvver goin' to let you war _her_ things."

I was a wretched child for a long time after this. Whenever I retired
into the inner chambers of my imagination—as was my wont when grown-up
people talked politics, or religion, or slavery—I found my pretty
fairies all fled, and in their places hollow-eyed goblins and ghosts.
If my gentle Aunt Susannah was permitted to come back to her home, how
about all the others who had lived there? My aunt coming for her final
good-night kiss would uncover a hot face, to be instantly recovered
upon her departure. _Par parenthèse_, I never did wear Aunt Susannah's
jewels. All disappeared mysteriously except the chain of lovely beads.
These I wore. One night I slept in them and the next morning they
were gone. Whither? Ah, you must call up some one of those long-time
sleepers. According to latter-day lights, they may "come when you do
call." They may know. I never did know.




CHAPTER IV


No house in Virginia was more noted for hospitality than my uncle's.
I remember an ever coming and going procession of Taylors, Pendletons,
Flemings, Fontaines, Pleasants, etc. These made small impression upon
me. Men might come and men might go, but my lessons went on forever;
writing, geography, and much reading. I had Mrs. Sherwood's books. I
wonder if any present-day child reads "Little Henry and his Bearer,"
or Miss Edgeworth's "Rosamond," or "Peter Parley's Four Quarters of
the Globe"! Hannah More was the great influence with my aunt and her
friends. "Thee will be a second Hannah More" was the highest praise the
literary family at Shrubbery Hill could possibly give me. Mr. Augustine
Birrell could never have written his sarcastic review of her in my day.
It would not have been tolerated. From Miss Edgeworth, Cowper, Burns,
St. Pierre, my aunt read aloud to me. On every centre table, along with
the astral lamp, lay a sumptuous volume in cream and gold. This was
the elegant annual "Friendship's Offering," containing the much-admired
poems of one Alfred Tennyson, collaborating with his brother Charles.
Miss Martineau was much discussed and was distinctly unpopular. Stories
were told of her peculiarities, her ignorance of the etiquette of polite
society at the North. When she was in Washington in 1835, was invited
by Mrs. Samuel Harrison Smith to an informal dinner at five o'clock.
Mrs. Smith had requested three friends to meet her, and had arranged
for "a small, genteel dinner." She had descended to the parlor at an
early hour to arrange some flowers, when her daughter informed her that
Miss Martineau and her companion, Miss Jeffrey, had arrived, and were
upstairs in her bedroom, having requested to be shown to a chamber. Mrs.
Smith wrote to Mrs. Kirkpatrick: "I hastened upstairs and found them
combing their hair! They had taken off their bonnets and large capes.
'You see,' said Miss Martineau, 'we have complied with your request
and come sociably to spend the day with you. We have been walking all
the morning; our lodgings were too distant to return, so we have done
as those who have no carriages do in England when they go to pass a
social day.' I offered her combs, brushes, etc., but showing me the
enormous pockets in her French dress she said that they were provided
with all that was necessary, and pulled out nice little silk shoes, silk
stockings, a scarf for her neck, little lace mits, a gold chain, and
some other jewellery, and soon, without changing her dress, was prettily
equipped for dinner or evening company. It was a rich treat to hear her
talk when the candles were lit and the curtains drawn. Her words flow
in a continuous stream, her voice is pleasing, her manners quiet and
ladylike." She was thought to be unfriendly to the South—which I have
the best of reasons for believing was true.

All this I heard with unheeding ears, but a delicious, memorable hour
awaited me. Some guest had brought her maid, and from her I heard a
wonderful fairy-godmother story,—of one Cinderella, whose light footstep
would not break a glass slipper.

Uncle Remus had not yet dawned upon a waiting world of children, but
Cowper had written charmingly about hares and how to domesticate them.
I had a flourishing colony of "Little Rabs." Some of my humble friends
were domiciled in the small playhouse built for me in the garden. Into
this sacred refuge, ascended by a flight of tiny steps, even Gabriella
was forbidden to enter. I could just manage to stand under the low
ceiling. There I entertained a strange company. I had no toys of any
description, and only one doll, which was much too fine for every day.
Flowers and forked sticks served for the _dramatist personæ_ of my
plays.

I had never heard of Æsop or of Aristophanes, but it was early given to
me to discern the excellent points of frogs. I caught a number of them
on the sandy margin of a little brook which ran at the bottom of the
garden, and Milly helped me to dress them in bits of muslin and lace.
Their ungraceful figures forbade their masquerading as ladies,—a frog
has "no more waist than the continent of Africa,"—but with caps and
long skirts they made admirable infants, creeping in the most orthodox
fashion. Of course their prominent eyes and wide mouths left something
to be desired; but these were very dear children, over whose mysterious
disappearance their adoptive mother grieved exceedingly. Could it be
that snakes—but no! The suggestion is too awful!

My aunt had a warm affection for a kinswoman who lived seven or eight
miles from us. This lady's gentleness and sweetness made her a welcome
visitor, and I never tired of hearing her talk, albeit her manner was
tinged with sadness. She grieved over the disappearance, years before,
of a dear young brother. He had simply dropped out of sight—her "poor
Brother Ben!" This was a great mystery which she often discussed with
my aunt, and which delightfully stirred my imagination.

One night late in summer a cold storm of rain and wind howled without
and beat against the window-panes. A fire was kindled on the hearth, and
around it the family gathered for a cosey evening. Suddenly some one
saw a face pressed against the window, and hastened to open the door
to the benighted visitor. There, dripping upon the threshold, stood a
wretched-looking man. It was Brother Ben!

He carried a bundle of blankets on his back which he proceeded to
unwind, revealing at last two tiny Indian girls! The frightened little
creatures clung to him closely, and only after being brought to the
fire and fed on warm milk were sufficiently reassured to permit him to
explain himself. With one on each knee, "Brother Ben" told his story. He
had run away to escape the restraints of home and had found his way to
the wild Western country beyond the Ohio. Friendly Indians had sheltered
and succored him, and he had finally married a young daughter of their
chief. When his children were born, he "came to himself." He could not
endure the prospect of rearing them among savages, and so had stolen
them from their mother's wigwam during her temporary absence, and was
well on his way before his theft was discovered. For days and nights
he was in the wilderness, fording rivers, climbing mountains, hiding
under the bushes at night. Finally he overtook a party of homeward-bound
huntsmen, and in their company succeeded in reaching his sister's door.

I never knew what became of him, but the children were adopted by their
aunt as her own. They were queer little round creatures, knowing no
word of English, but affectionate and docile. I was much with them,
delighting to teach them. I cared no more for Gabriella nor my rabbits
and frogs. I thought no more of fairies and midnight apparitions. Here
was food enough for imagination, different from anything I had ever
dreamed of,—romance brought to my very door.

Without doubt the Indian mother, far away towards the setting sun, wept
for her babes, but nobody, excepting myself, seemed to think of her.
Could I write to her? Could I, some day, find a huntsman going westward
and send her a message? She might even come to them! Some dark night I
might see her dusky face pressed against the window-pane, peering in!

As time wore on, the children grew to be great girls, and their Indian
peculiarities of feature and coloring became so pronounced that they
were constantly wounded by being mistaken for mulattoes. There was no
school in Virginia where they could be happy. No lady would willingly
allow her little girls to associate with them. Evidently there was no
future for them in Virginia. Finally their aunt found through our Quaker
friends an excellent school, I think in Ohio, and thither the little
wanderers were sent, were kindly treated, were educated, and grew up to
be good women who married well.

My aunt made many long journeys—across the state to the White Sulphur
Springs of which I remember nothing but crowds and discomfort—to
Amherst, where my father lived, to Charlotte to visit my grandfather,
and to Albemarle to visit friends among the mountains. She joined
house-parties for a few weeks every summer; and one of these I, then a
very little child, can perfectly recollect.

The country house, like all Virginia houses, was built of elastic
material capable of sheltering any number of guests, many of whom
remained all summer. Indeed, this was expected when a visit was
promised. "My dear sir," said the master of Westover to a departing
guest who had sought shelter from a rain-storm, "My dear sir, do stay
and pay us a visit."

The guest pleaded business that forbade his compliance. "Well, well,"
said Major Drewry, "if you can't pay us a visit, come for two or three
weeks at least."

"Week ends" were unknown in Virginia, and equally out of the question an
invitation limited by the host to prescribed days and hours. Sometimes
a happy guest would ignore time altogether and stay along from season
to season. I cannot remember a parallel case to that of Isaac Watts,
who, invited by Sir Thomas Abney to spend a night at Stoke Newington,
accepted with great cheerfulness and staid twenty years, but I do
remember that an invitation for one night brought to a member of our
family a pleasant couple who remained four years. Virginia was excelled,
it seems, by the mother country.

At this my first house-party there were many young people—among them
the famous beauty, Anne Carmichael, and the then famous poet and
novelist, Jane Lomax. These, with a number of bright young men, made a
gay party. Every moonlight night it was the custom to bring the horses
to the door-steps, and all would mount and go off for a visit to some
neighbor. I was told, however, that the object of these nocturnal rides
was to enable Miss Lomax to write poetry on the moon, and I was sorely
perplexed as to the possibility, without the longest kind of a pen, of
accomplishing such a feat. I spent hours reasoning out the problem,
and had finally almost brought myself to the point of consulting the
young lady herself,—although I distinctly thought there was something
mysterious and uncanny about her,—when something occurred which strained
relations between her and myself.

An uninteresting bachelor from town had appeared on the scene, to the
chagrin of the young people, whose circle was complete without him. He
belonged to the class representing in that day the present-day "little
brothers of the rich," often the most agreeable relations the rich can
boast, but in this case decidedly the reverse.

It was thought that the present intruder was "looking for a wife,"—he
had been known to descend upon other house-parties without an
invitation,—and it was deliberately determined to give him the most
frigid of cold shoulders. Our amiable hostess, however, emphatically
put a stop to this. I learned the state of things and resented it.
"Old True," as he was irreverently nicknamed, was a friend of mine. I
resolved to devote myself to him, and to espouse his cause against his
enemies.

One day when the young ladies were together in my aunt's room there was
great merriment over the situation in regard to "old True," and many
jests to his disadvantage related and laughed over. To my great delight
Miss Lomax presently announced: "Now, girls, this is all nonsense! Mr.
Trueheart is a favorite of mine. I shall certainly accept him if he asks
me."

I believed her literally. I saw daylight for my injured friend, and
immediately set forth to find him. He was sitting alone under the trees,
on the lawn, and welcomed the little girl tripping over the grass to
keep him company. On his knee I eagerly gave him my delightful news, and
saw his face illumined by it. I was perfectly happy—and so, he assured
me, was he!

That evening my aunt observed an unwonted excitement in my face and
manner—and after feeling my pulse and hot cheeks decided I was better
off in bed, and sent me to my room, which happened to be in a distant
part of the house. To reach it I had to go through a long, narrow,
dark hall. I always traversed this hall at night with bated breath.
Tiny doors were let into the wall near the floor, opening into small
apertures then known by the obsolescent name of "cuddies." I was
afraid to pass them. So far from the family, nobody would hear me if I
screamed. Suppose something were to jump out at me from those cuddies!

In the middle of this fearsome place I heard quick steps behind. Before
I could run or scream, strong fingers gripped my shoulders and shook
me, and a fierce whisper hissed in my ear—"_You little devil!_"

It was the poetess—the lady who wrote verses on the moon! "Old True"
had suffered no grass to grow under his feet!

He left early next morning and so did we—my aunt perceiving that the
excitement of the gay house-party was not good for me.

I learned there were other things besides hot roast apples to be
avoided. Fingers might be burned by meddling with people's love affairs.

We were not the only guests who left the hospitable, gay, noisy,
sleep-forbidding house. Our host had an eccentric sister whom we all
addressed as "Cousin Betsey Michie," and who had left her own home
expressly to spend a few weeks here with my aunt, to whom she was much
attached. When "Cousin Betsey" discovered our intended departure, she
ordered her maid "Liddy" to pack her trunk,—a little nail-studded box
covered with goatskin,—and insisted upon claiming us as her guests for
the rest of the season.

"Cousin Betsey" was to me a terrible old lady,—large, masculine,
"hard-favored," and with a wart on her chin. I wondered what I should
do, were she ever to kiss me,—which she never did,—and had made up my
mind to keep away from her as far as possible. I owed her nothing, I
reasoned, as she was not really my cousin. She used strong language,
and was intolerant of all the singing, dancing, and midnight rides of
the young people. Her room was immediately beneath mine. But the night
before, lying awake after my startling interview with the poetess, I
had heard the galloping horses of the party returning from a midnight
visit to "Edgeworth," and the harsh voice of Cousin Betsey calling to
her sister: "Maria, Maria! Don't you dare get out of bed to give those
scamps supper—a passel of ramfisticated villains, cavorting all over
the country like wild Indians."

A peal of musical laughter, and "Oh, Cousin Betsey!" was the answer of
a merry horsewoman below.

As we heard much about Johnsonian English from Cousin Betsey, it was
reasonable to suppose, my aunt thought, that the startling word was
classic.

One evening while we were her guests she suddenly asked if I could
write. I was about to give her an indignant affirmative, when my aunt
interrupted, "Not very well." She knew I should be pressed into service
as a secretary.

"She ought to learn," said Cousin Betsey. "My own writing is more like
Greek than English since my eyes fail me. Maria Gordon has been copying
for me, but such fantastic flourishes! It will be Greek copied into
Sanskrit if _she_ does it. Well, what can the child do? Come here, miss.
Are your hands clean? Ah! Wash them again, honey; you must help Liddy
make the Fuller's pies for my dinner-party to-morrow."

I was aghast! But I found the "Fuller's pies" were quite within my
powers. "Pie" was not the American institution, but the bird supposed to
hide itself in its nest. "_Je m'en vais chercher un grand peut-estre. Il
est au nid de la pie_," says Rabelais. As to my hands—I feel persuaded
that Cousin Betsey's guests would have been reassured could they have
known to a certainty the old lady had not prepared them with her own!
A glass bowl was placed before me forthwith,—a bowl of boiling water,
some almonds and raisins. "Liddy" blanched the almonds in the hot
water and instructed me to press each one neatly into a large raisin,
which, puffing out around the nut, made it resemble an acorn, or,
to the instructed, a nest. These were the "pies" (birds in a nest),
and very attractive they were, piled in the quaint old bowl with its
fine diamond cutting. As to the "Fuller" thus immortalized, I looked
him up, furtively, in the great Johnson's Dictionary which lay in
solitary grandeur upon a table in the old lady's bedroom. Finding him
unsatisfactory, I concluded Dr. Johnson was not, after all, the great
man Cousin Betsey would have me believe. She quoted him on all occasions
as authority upon all subjects. Boswell's Life of him, "Rasselas," "The
Journey to the Hebrides," and "The Rambler" held places of honor upon
the shelves of her small bookcase. "Read these, child," she reiterated,
"and you need read nothing else. They will teach you to speak and write
_English_,—you need no other language,—and everything else you need know
except sewing and cooking." I soon became interested in her own literary
work. She was, at the moment, engaged in writing a novel, "Some Fact and
Some Fiction," which was to appear serially in the _Southern Literary
Messenger_. I listened "with all my ears" to her talk concerning
it with my aunt. It was to be a satire upon the affectations of the
day—especially upon certain innovations in dress and custom brought
by her cousin "Judy," the accomplished wife of our late Minister to
France, Mr. Rives, and transplanted upon the soil of Albemarle County;
also the introduction of Italian words to music in place of good old
English. The heroine was exquisitely simple, her muslin gown clasped
with a modest pearl brooch and a rose-geranium leaf. Her language was
fine Johnsonian English—a sort of vitalized "Lucilla," like the heroine
in Miss Hannah More's "Cœlebs." As to the Italian words for music, I
blithely committed to memory this sarcastic travesty, sung for me in
Cousin Betsey's sonorous contralto:—

     The Frog he did a'courting ride,
       Rigdum bulamitty kimo—
     With sword and buckler by his side—
       Rigdum bulamitty kimo.

     (_Chorus_)

     Kimo naro, delta karo!
       Kimo naro, kimo!
     Strim stram promedidle larabob rig
       Rigdum bulamitty kimo!

This was deemed a clever satire on the unintelligible Italian words of
recent songs, and ran through several verses, describing the Frog's
courtship of Mistress Mouse, who seems to have been a fair lady with
domestic habits who lived in a mill and was occupied with her spinning.

I was full of anticipation on the great day of the dinner-party. Mrs.
Rives, Ella Page her niece, and little Amélie Rives—named for her
godmother the queen of France—were the only invited guests. The house
was spick and span. I filled a bowl with damask roses from the garden,
sparing the microphylla clusters that hung so prettily over the front
porch. The dinner was to be at two o'clock.

A few minutes before two a sable horseman galloped up to the door,
dismounted, and, scraping his foot backward as he bared a head covered
with gray wool, presented a note which my aunt read aloud:—

                                       "CASTLE HILL, Wednesday noon.

     "DEAR COUSIN BETSEY:—I know you will be amiable enough to
     pardon me when I tell you how _désolée_ I am to find the hours
     have flown unheeded by, and we are too late for your dinner!
     The young ladies and I were reading Byron together, and you
     know how

          "'Noiseless falls the foot of time
          That only treads on flowers.'

     I am sure you forgive us, and hope you will prove it by asking
     us again.

                            "Your affectionate cousin,
                                                     "JUDITH RIVES."

There was an ominous pause—and then the old dame said, in her sternest
magisterial manner:—

"Tell Judy Rives to read Byron less—and Lord Chesterfield more." Turning
to my aunt after the dignified old servitor had bowed himself out, she
said, with fine scorn: "There's no use in telling _her_ to read Dr.
Samuel Johnson! '_Désolée_,' forsooth!—and 'the foot of time'! That
sounds like that idiot, Tom Moore."

I had a very good time at Cousin Betsey's. I helped to pick the berries
and gather the eggs from the nests in the privet hedge. Also for several
days I had a steady diet of "Fuller's pies."

As to the novel, if it appeared at all it fell upon the public ear with
a dull thud. Still, Cousin Betsey must have been, in her way, a great
woman, for it was of her that Thomas Jefferson exclaimed, "God send she
were a man, that I might make her Professor in my University."




CHAPTER V


Something akin to the tulip mania of Holland possessed the Southern
country in the early thirties. The _Morus multicaulis_, upon the leaves
of which the silkworm feeds, can be propagated from slips or cuttings.
These cuttings commanded a fabulous price. To plant them was to lay a
sure foundation for a great fortune.

My uncle visited Richmond at a time when the mania had reached
fever-heat. Men hurried through the streets, with bundles of twigs under
their arms, as if they were flying from an enemy. All over the city
auction sales were held, and fortunes lost or gained—as they are to-day
in Wall Street—with the fluctuations of the market. "I saw old Jerry
White running with a bundle of sticks under his arm as if the devil
were after him," said my uncle,—lazy, rheumatic old Jerry, who had not
for years left his chimney corner in winter, or the bench upon which he
basked like a lizard in summer, except to eat and sleep!

Long galleries, roofed with glass, were hastily erected all over the
country, the last year's eggs of the _Bombyx mori_ obtained at great
price, and the freshly gathered leaves of the _Morus multicaulis_ laid
in readiness for their hatching.

My uncle ridiculed this madness, although as a physician it interested
him.

"It does people good to stir them up," he declared. "It wakes up their
livers and keeps them out of mischief. It is a fine tonic. They will
need no bark and camomile while the fever lasts."

We made a pilgrimage to the distant farm of one of the maniacs. With
my narrow skirts drawn closely around me, I tiptoed gingerly along the
aisles dividing the long tables, and saw the hideous, grayish yellow,
three-inch worms—each one armed with a rhinoceros-like horn on his
head—devouring leaves for dear life. They had need for haste. Their time
was short. Think of the millions of brave men and fair ladies who were
waiting for the strong, shining threads it was their humble destiny
to spin! Meanwhile, the lazy moths, their _raison d'être_ having been
accomplished, enjoyed in elegant leisure the evening of their days
of beneficence. I saw the ease with which their spider-web thread was
caught in hot water, and wound in balls as easily as I wound the wools
for my aunt's knitting.

Nothing came of it all! In time all the _Morus multicaulis_ was dug up,
and good, sensible corn planted in its stead. Old Jerry found again his
warm seat by the ingleside, where doubtless he

     "backward mused on wasted time,"

and many a better man than poor Jerry was stricken with amazement at
his own folly. Does not _Morus_ come from the Greek word for "fool"?

Next to his Bible and the Westminster Catechism, my uncle pinned his
faith to the _Richmond Whig_. Henry Clay was his idol. To make Henry
Clay President of the United States was something to live for. When
the great man passed through Virginia, all Hanover went to Richmond to
do him honor, ourselves among the number. He was a son of Hanover, the
"Mill boy of the Slashes." The old Mother of Presidents could, never
fear, give yet another son to the country! No living man except Webster
equalled him in all that the world holds essential to greatness—none
was as dear to the mass of people. And yet neither could be elected to
the post of Chief Magistrate of those adoring people!

Clay, at the time he visited Richmond, was confident he would win this
honor. My uncle resolved I should see "the next President." A procession
of citizens was to conduct him to a hall where a banquet awaited him. My
uncle found a vacant doorstep on the line of march, and there we awaited
the great man's coming. "Ah, there he comes!" exclaimed my uncle. "Look
well, little girl! You may never again see the greatest man in the
world." But to look was impossible. The crowd thronged us, and my uncle
caught me to a vantage-ground on his shoulder. A tumbling sea of hats
was all I could see! Presently a space appeared in the procession, and a
tall man on the arm of another looked up with a rare smile to the small
maiden, lifted his hat, and bowed to her! My uncle never allowed me to
forget that one supreme moment in my child-life. To this day I cannot
look at the fine bronze statuette of Henry Clay in my husband's library
without a sensation born of the pride of that hour.

I am afraid the small maiden dearly loved glory! Nobody would ever
have guessed the ambitious little heart beating, the next winter,
under the cherry merino; nor the conscious lips deep in her poke-bonnet
that followed the prayers at church and implored mercy for a miserable
sinner! For she had, during that glorious summer, another shining hour
to remember. Those penitent lips had been kissed by a great man all the
way from England—a man who had kissed the hand of a queen! She had a dim
apprehension of virtue through the laying on of hands in church. What,
then, might not come in the way of royal attribute from the laying on
of lips!

Great thoughts like these so swelled my bosom that I was fain to reveal
them to my little Quaker cousin at Shrubbery Hill. She received them
gravely. "Oh, Sara Agnes," she ventured, "I am afraid thee is going
to be one of the world's people!" All the same she had just dressed
her doll Isabella in black silk, with a lace mantilla! The Princess
Isabella, born, like myself, in 1830, was even then known as the future
queen of Spain. It was an age of young queens.

Among the strangers from abroad who found their way to Virginia, none
was more honored in Hanover than the Quaker author and philanthropist,
Joseph John Gurney. He was the brother of Elizabeth Fry, who gave her
life to the amelioration of the prison horrors of England.

My uncle entertained Dr. Gurney. The house was filled with guests to its
utmost capacity. A picture of the long dining-tables rises before me—the
gold-and-white best service, the flowers—and the sweetest flower of all,
my young aunt. She was tall and graceful and very beautiful,—with large
gray eyes, dark curls framing her face, delicate features, a lovely
smile! She wore a narrow gown of pearl silk, the "surplice" waist belted
high, and sleeves distended at the top by means of feather cushions tied
in the armholes. I remember my uncle ordered the dinner to be served
quietly and in a leisurely manner. "These Englishmen eat deliberately,"
he said. "Only Americans bolt their food."

In the evening, after the dinner company had left, a small party
gathered around the astral lamp in the parlor, and Dr. Gurney drew forth
his scrap-book and pencils, and began, as he talked, to retouch sketches
he had made during his journey. The parlor was simply furnished. The
Virginian of that day seemed to attach small importance to the style
of his furniture. His chief pride was in his table, his fine wines, his
horses and equipage, and the perfect comfort he could give his guests.
There was no bric-a-brac, there were no pictures or brackets on the
wall. "I have now," said an artist to me, "seen everything hung on
American walls except buckwheat cakes! I have seen the plate in which
they were served."

This parlor at Cedar Grove admitted but one picture—a fine copy over
the mantel of the School of Athens, which my cousin Charles had brought
as a present for my aunt, when he last returned from abroad. She was
not responsible for the taste of this inherited home, which she had
not tenanted very long. The walls of the parlor were papered with a
wonderful representation of a Venetian scene—printed at intervals
of perhaps four or more feet. There was a castle with turrets and
battlements; and a marble stair, flanked with roses in pots, descending
into the water. Down this stair came the most adorable creature in
the world,—roses on her brocade gown, roses on her broad hat,—and at
the foot of the stair a cavalier, also adorable, extended his hand
to conduct her to the gondola in waiting. In the distance were more
castles, more sea, more gondolas.

In this room the distinguished stranger met the company convened in
his honor. If he gasped or shuddered at the ornate walls, he gave no
sign. The little girl on the ottoman in the chimney corner, permitted
to sit up late because of the rare occasion, listened with wide
eyes to conversation she could not understand. Weighty matters were
discussed,—for all the world was alive to the question which had to
be met later,—the possibility of freeing the slaves under the present
constitutional laws. This was a small gathering of the wise men of our
neighborhood—come to consult a wise man from the country that had met
and solved a similar problem. Perhaps all of these men had, like my
uncle, given freedom to inherited slaves.

Presently I found myself, as I half dreamed in the corner, caught up
by strong arms to the bosom of the great man himself. Bending over the
sleepy head, he whispered a strange story—how that, far away across the
seas, there was once a little girl "just like you" who loved her play,
and loved to sit up and hear grown people talk—how a lady came to her
one day and said, "My child, you must study and learn to deny yourself
much pleasure, for soon you will be the queen of England"—how the little
girl neither laughed nor cried, but said, "I will be good"—how time
had gone on, and she had kept her promise and was now grown up to be a
lovely lady; and sure enough, just a little while ago had been crowned
queen—and how everybody was glad, because they knew, as she had been a
good child, she would be a good queen.

That was a long time ago. Many things have happened and been forgotten
since then; the Venetian lady and her cavalier have sailed away in
unknown seas; the good Englishman has long since gone to his rest; the
queen has won, God grant, an immortal crown, having lived to be old,
never forgetting all along her life her promise; and the little girl
has lived to be old, too! She has dreamed many dreams, but none more
beautiful than the one she probably dreamed that night,—all roses and
castles and gondolas, and a gracious young queen lovelier than all the
rest.

Thus passed the first eight years of my life. Compared with those that
followed, they were years of absolute serenity and happiness. They were
not gay. This was the time when people who "feared God and desired to
save their souls" felt bound to forsake the Established Church, many of
whose clergy had become objects of disgust rather than of reverence.
Dissenters and Quakers lived all around us; my uncle and aunt were
Presbyterians, and I heard little but sober talk in my early years.
Sometimes we attended the silent meetings of the Quakers, and sometimes
old St. Martin's, to which many of our Episcopal friends belonged.
Extreme asceticism, however, was as far from the temper of my aunt
and uncle as was the extreme of dissipation. They were strict in the
observance of the Sabbath and of all religious duties. Temperance in
speech and living, moderation, serenity,—these ruled the life at Cedar
Grove.

And so, although I cannot claim that

     "There was a star that danced,
     And under it I was born,"

I look back with gratitude unspeakable to a beautiful childhood, and
bless the memory of those who suffered no "shapes of ill to hover near
it," and mar its perfect innocence.




CHAPTER VI


When it was found that a refined and intelligent society was inclined
to crystallize around the court green of Albemarle County, it became
imperative to choose a fitting name for a promising young village.

In 1761 there was a charming princess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz;
intelligent, amiable, and only seventeen years of age. She had stepped
forth from the conventional ranks of the young noblewomen of her day,
and written a spirited letter to Frederick the Great, in which she
entreated him to stop the ravages of war then desolating the German
States. She had painted in vivid colors the miseries resulting from the
brutality of the Prussian soldiery.

It appears that this letter reached the eyes of the Prince of Wales.
He fell in love with the letter before he ever knew the writer. In the
same year that he, as George III, ascended the throne of England, the
lovely Charlotte, Princess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, became his wife.
Charlottesville, then, was a name of happy omen for the pretty little
town, and in three more years a county was created, it would seem,
expressly that it might be called "Mecklenburg," and yet again a slice
taken from another county to form the county of Charlotte.

The colony of Virginia was strewn thickly with the names of royal
England: King and Queen, Charles City,—Charlestown,—King George, King
William, William and Mary, Prince Edward, Princess Anne, Caroline,
Prince George, Henrico, Prince William. No less than four rivers were
named in honor of the good Queen Anne: Rapidan, North Anna, South Anna,
Rivanna. We might almost call the roll of the House of Lords from a list
of Virginia counties.

Twenty-four years after the Princess Charlotte had become a queen, Mrs.
Abigail Adams, as our minister's wife, was presented at the Court of St.
James. Alas for time,—and perhaps for prejudice,—she found, in place
of the charming princess, an "embarrassed woman, not well-shaped nor
handsome, although bravely attired in purple and silver." The interview
was cold and stilted, but all the "embarrassment" was on the part of
royalty.

There had been a recent unpleasantness between John Bull and Brother
Jonathan; King George, however, brave Briton as he was, broke the ice,
and startled Mrs. Adams by giving her a hearty kiss! She could not
venture, however, to remind the queen that we had named counties in
her honor. She might, in her present state of mind, have deemed it an
impertinence on our part.

  [Illustration: RESIDENCE OF DR. S. P. HARGRAVE.]

I am so impatient under descriptions of scenery, that I do not like
to inflict them upon others. But I wish I could stand with my reader
upon the elliptic plain formed by cutting down the apex of Monticello.
He would, I am sure, appreciate the fascination of mountain, valley,
and river which drew the first settlers, and later the Randolphs,
Gilmers, William Wirt, and Thomas Jefferson, to the region around
Charlottesville. On the east the almost level scene is bounded by the
horizon, and on the west the land seems to billow onward, wave after
wave, until it rises in the noble crests of the Blue Ridge Mountains.
A mist of green at our feet is pierced here and there by the simple
belfries of the village churches, and a little farther on, glimpses
appear of the classic Pantheon and long colonnades of the University
of Virginia. Imagination may fill in this picture, but reality will far
exceed imagination, especially if the happy moment is caught at sunset
when the mountains change color, from rose through delicate shadings
to amethyst, and finally paint themselves deep blue against the evening
sky. Then, should that sky chance to be veiled with light, fleecy clouds
all flame and gold—but I forbear!

This was the spot chosen by my aunt as the very best for my education
and my social life. The town was small in the forties, indeed, is not
yet a city. It is described at that time as having four churches, two
book-stores, several dry-goods stores, and a female seminary. The family
of Governor Gilmer lived on one of the little hills, Mr. Valentine
Southall on another, and we were fortunate enough to secure a third,
with a glorious view of the mountains and with grounds terraced to
the foot of the hill. Large gardens, grounds, and ornamental trees
surrounded all the houses. The best of these were of plain brick of
uniform unpretentious architecture, comfortable, and ample. A small
brick building at the foot of our lawn was my uncle's office, and behind
it, on my tenth birthday, he made me plant a tree.

The "Female Seminary" had been really the magnet that drew my dear aunt.
It was a famous school, presided over by an excellent and much-loved
Presbyterian clergyman. There it was supposed I should learn everything
my aunt could not teach me.

Behold me, then, on a crisp October morning wending my way to the
great brick hive for girls. I was going with my aunt to be examined
for admission. Her thoughts were, doubtless, anxious enough about
the creditable showing I should make. Mine were anxious, too. I was
conscious of a linen bretelle apron under my pelisse, and my mind was
far from clear about the propriety of so juvenile a garment. Suppose no
other girl wore bretelle aprons!

However, when we marched up the broad brick-paved walk and ascended the
steps of the great building, whose many windows seemed to stare at us
like lidless eyes, bretelle aprons sank into insignificance.

The room into which we were ushered seemed to be filled with hundreds
of girls, and the Reverend Doctor's desk on a platform towered over
them. He was most affable and kind. The examination lasted only a few
minutes, a list of books was given me, and a desk immediately in front
of the principal assigned me. Books were borrowed from some other girl,
the lessons for the next day pointed out, and my school life began.

Remember, I had not yet planted my tenth birthday tree. These were
the books deemed suitable for my age,—Abercrombie's "Intellectual
Philosophy," Watts on the "Improvement of the Mind," Goldsmith's
"History of Greece," and somebody's Natural Philosophy.

I worked hard on these subjects with the result that, as I could
not understand them, I learned by rote a few words in answer to the
questions. A bright, amiable little scrap of a girl, who always knew
her lessons, volunteered to assist me. If any collector of old books
should happen to find a volume of Watts on the Mind, much thumbed,
and blotted here and there with tears, and should see within the early
pages pencilled brackets enclosing the briefest possible answer to the
questions, that book, those tears, were mine; and the brackets are the
loving marks made by Margaret Wolfe, whose memory I ever cherish.

"What is Logic?" questions the teacher's guide at the bottom of the
pages.

"Logic," answers Dr. Watts (in conspicuous pencilled brackets), "is the
art of investigating and communicating Truth."

I had been struggling with Dr. Watts, Abercrombie, _et al._, for several
months, when my aunt reluctantly realized that, however admirable the
school might be for others, I was not improving in mind or health. As
soon as she arrived at this conclusion, she decided to experiment with
no more large female seminaries, but to educate me, as best she could,
at home.

At the same time I know that my dear aunt suffered from the overthrow
of all her plans for my education. She had, for my sake, made great
sacrifices in leaving her inherited home. These sacrifices were all for
naught. She must have felt keen disappointment, and regret at the loss,
toil, expense,—and, above all, my worse than wasted time.

Yet, after all, my time at school may not have been utterly thrown
away! The experience may have borne fruit that I know not of.
Moreover, I _had_ learned something! I learned that Logic is the art of
investigating and communicating Truth!




CHAPTER VII


Masters were found in a preparatory school for my home education. Happy
to escape from the schoolroom, I worked as never maiden worked before,
loving my summer desk in the apple tree in the garden, loving my winter
desk beside the blazing wood in my uncle's office, passionately loving
my music, and interested in the other studies assigned me. With no
competitive examinations to stimulate me, I yet made good progress.
Before I reached my thirteenth year, I had learned to read French
easily. I had wept over the tender story of Picciola and the sorrows
of Paul and Virginia. I had sailed with Ulysses and trod the flowery
fields with Calypso. My aunt had beguiled me into a course of history
by allowing me as reward those romances of Walter Scott which are
founded on historical events. My love of music and desire to excel in
it made me patient under the eccentric itinerant music teacher, the one
pioneer apostle of classic music in all Virginia, who was known, more
than once, to arrive at midnight and call me up for my lesson; and who,
while other maidens were playing the "Battle of Prague" and "Bonaparte
crossing the Rhine," or singing the campaign songs of the hero of the
log cabin, taught me to love Beethoven and Liszt, and to discern the
answering voices in that genius, then young, whose magic music fell
not then, nor ever after, upon unheeding ears. I had read with my aunt
selections all the way from "The Faerie Queene" through the times of
later queens,—Elizabeth and Anne,—and had made a beginning with the
queen for whom I had a sentiment, and who has given her name to so fair
an age of fancy and of elegant writing. Alas, for the mental training
I might have had through the study of mathematics! Were it not that
the lack of this training must be apparent to all who are kind enough
to listen to my story, I might quote Joseph Jefferson, as Mr. William
Winter reports him: "Why, look at me! I seem to have managed pretty
well, but I couldn't for the life of me add up a column of figures." The
only figures I know anything about are figures of speech. Fortunately, I
have had little use for addition. My knowledge has been quite sufficient
for my needs.

My French teacher, Mr. Mertons,—a square-shouldered, spectacled German,
with an upright shock of coarse black hair, literally pounded the
French language into me. With a grammar held aloft in his left hand, he
emphasized every rule with his right fist, coming down hard on my aunt's
mahogany. If success is to be measured by results, I can only say that,
although I perceived some charm in Mme. de Sévigné and in Dumas, I was
rather dense with Racine and Molière; and as to the spoken language!
I can usually manage to convey, by gesture and deliberate English,
a twilight glimmer of my meaning in talking to a polite Frenchman,
but blank darkness descends upon him when I speak to him in "a French
not spoken in France." The gift for "divers kinds of tongues" was not
bestowed upon me.

The music teacher deserves more than a passing notice. He was unique.
Mr. William C. Rives found him somewhere in France, and promised
him a large salary if he would come to America, live near or in
Charlottesville, and teach his daughter Amélie. He was the incarnation
of thriftlessness; with no polish of manner, no idea of business,
or order, or of the necessity of paying a debt, but he was also the
incarnation of music! My uncle again and again satisfied the sheriff
and released him from bonds. Finally, he could not appear in town at
all by daylight, and often arrived at midnight for my lesson. Gladly my
aunt would rise and dress to preside over it. My teacher would disappear
before the dawn. He owed money all over town which he had not the
faintest intention of ever paying. More than once his defenceless back
could have borne witness to a creditor's outraged feelings. But he was
resourceful. Thereafter he carried all his music, a thick package, in a
case sewed to the lining of his coat. His back, rather than his breast,
needed a shield. It was amusing to see him pack himself up, as it were,
before venturing into the open.

But with all this, we prized him above rubies. He was a brilliant
pianist, a great genius; had studied with Liszt, early appreciated
Chopin, adored Beethoven. One of his animated lessons would leave me in
a state "which fiddle-strings is weakness to express my nerves," and
yet no summons to duty ever thrilled me with pleasure like his "Koom
on ze biahno." Once there, absolute fidelity to the composer's writing
and the position of my hands exacted all my attention. The margins of
my music were liberally adorned with illustrations of my fist—a clumsy
bunch with an outsticking thumb.

I always felt keenly the charm of music, even when it was beyond my
comprehension. One day, happening to look up from his own playing,
he detected tears in my eyes. He was enraged in three languages.
"Himmel! Zis is not bathétique! Zis is _scherzo_! Eh, bien! I blay him
_adagio_." And under shut teeth a sibilant whisper sounded very much
like "_imbécile_," as he hung his head to one side, arched his brows,
and drawled out the theme in a ridiculous manner. Once I was so carried
away by a delicious passage I was playing that I diminished the _tempo_,
that the linked sweetness might be long drawn out. He literally danced!
He beat time furiously with both hands. "Ach! is it _you_ yourselluf,
know bedder zan ze great maestro," and sweeping me from the piano stool
he rendered the passage properly.

One summer my aunt, in order that I might have lessons, took board in
a country place where he lived. I was pleasing myself one day with a
little German song I had smuggled from town:—

     "The church bells are ringing, the village is gay,
     And Leila is dressed in her bridal array.
         She's wooed, and she's won
         By a proud Baron's son,
     And Leila, Leila, Leila's a Lady!"

Proceeding gayly with the chorus, and exulting in Leila's ladyship and
good fortune, I was startled by thunderous claps through the house. Mr.
Meerbach was fleeing to his own room, slamming the doors between himself
and my uneducated voice!

Of course he lost his scholars. At last only Amélie Rives, Jane Page,
Eliza Meriwether, and myself remained. We had to make up his salary
among us. "I hope you'll study, dear," said my kind uncle; "I am
now giving eight dollars apiece for your lessons." Jane Page played
magnificently. This rare young genius, a niece of Mrs. William C. Rives,
died young. The rest of us played well, too. My teacher wished to take
me to Richmond to play for Thalberg his own difficult, florid music,
and was terribly chagrined at my aunt's refusal to permit me to go.

The little Episcopal church and rectory were just across the street,
and the rector, Mr. Meade, allowed me free access to the gallery, where
I delighted to practise on the small pipe organ. I was just tall enough
to reach the foot notes. The church was peculiarly interesting from the
fact that Thomas Jefferson, who is supposed to have been a free thinker,
had insisted upon building it and had furnished the plans for it.
Before it was built, services were held in the Court House, which Mr.
Jefferson regularly attended, bringing his seat with him on horseback
from Monticello, "it being," says Bishop Meade, "of some light machinery
which, folded up, was carried under his arm and, unfolded, served for
a seat on the floor of the Court House."

I was thirteen years old when Mr. Meade sent for me one evening to come
to him in his vestry room. He told me that the Episcopal Convention was
to meet in his church in two days, and he had just discovered that Miss
Willy (the organist) had arranged an entire new service of chants and
hymns. He had requested her not to use it, urging that his father the
bishop, the clergy, and all his own people knew and loved the old tunes,
and could not join in the new. Miss Willy had indignantly resented his
interference and threatened to resign, with all her choir, unless he
yielded. "I shall certainly not yield," said the rector. "I have told
her that I know a little girl who will be glad to help me. Now I wish
you to play for the convention, beginning day after to-morrow (Sunday),
and every evening during its session. This will give you evening
services all the week, beginning with three on Sunday. I will see that
familiar hymns are selected, and you need chant none of the Psalms
except the Benedictus and Gloria in Excelsis."

I began, "Oh, I'm afraid—" "No," said Mr. Meade, "you're not afraid;
you are not going to be afraid. Just be in your place fifteen minutes
before the time, and draw the curtain between you and the audience. I
shall send you a good choir."

I practised with a will next day. On the great day, when I passed the
sable giant, Ossian, pulling away at the rope under the belfry, and
heard the solemn bell announcing that my hour had come, my heart sank
within me. But Ossian gave me a glittering smile which showed all his
magnificent ivories. He was grinning because he was going to pump the
organ for such a slip of a lass as I!

On arriving at the organ gallery, I found my choir,—several ladies whom
I knew, and a group of fine-looking students from the University. They
looked down kindly on the small organist, with her hair hanging in two
braids down her back. I resolutely kept that small back to the drawn
curtain! Only the tip of one of Miss Willy's nodding plumes, and I
should have been undone!

All went well. The singing was fine from half a dozen manly throats,
supplementing two or three female voices and my own little pipe. I was
soon lost to my surroundings in the enjoyment of my work. When, on the
last day, the good bishop asked for the grand old hymn, "How firm a
foundation, ye saints of the Lord," it thrilled my soul to hear the
church fill with the triumphant singing of the congregation, led by
little me and my improvised choir.




CHAPTER VIII


The society of Charlottesville in the forties was composed of a few
families of early residents and of the professors at the University.
Governor Gilmer, Secretary of the Navy in Tyler's time, Mr. Valentine
Southall of an old Virginia family, and himself eminent in his
profession of the law, Dr. Charles Carter, Professor Tucker, William B.
Rogers, Dr. McGuffey, Dr. Cabell, Professor Harrison,—all these names
are well known and esteemed to this day. There were young people in
these families, and all them were my friends. Along the road I have
travelled for so many years I have met none superior to them and very
few their equals.

My special coterie was a choice one. It included, among others, Lizzie
Gilmer (the lovely) and her sisters; beautiful Lucy Southall; Maria
Harrison and her sweet sister Mary, both accomplished in music and
literature; Eliza Rives and Mary McGuffey. James Southall, William C.
Rives, Jr., George Wythe Randolph, Jack Seddon, Kinsey Johns, Professor
Schéle de Vere, John Randolph Tucker, St. George Tucker—these were
habitués of my home, and all apparently interested in me and in my
music. To each name I might append a list of honors won, at the bar,
in literature, and in the army. I have survived them all—and I kept the
friendship of each one as long as he lived.

The customs in entertaining differed from those in vogue at the
present day. Afternoon teas, which had been fashionable during the
Revolution—tea then being a rare luxury—had not survived until the
forties. Choice Madeira in small glasses, and fruit-cake were offered
to afternoon callers. The cake must always be _au naturel_ if served
in the daytime. Cake iced—in evening dress—was only permissible at the
evening hour.

Dinner-parties demanded a large variety of dishes. They were not served
_à la Russe_. Two table-cloths were _de rigueur_ for a dinner company.
One was removed with the dishes of meat, vegetables, celery, and many
pickles, all of which had been placed at once upon the table. The
cut-glass and silver dessert dishes rested on the finest damask the
housewife could provide. This cloth removed, left the mahogany for the
final walnuts and wine.

Three o'clock was a late hour for a dinner-party—the ordinary family
dinner was at two. The large silver tureen, which is now enjoying a
dignified old age on our sideboards, had then place at the foot of the
table. After soup, boiled fish appeared at the head.

An interview has been preserved between a Washington hostess of the
time and Henry, an "experienced and fashionable" caterer. Upon being
required to furnish the smallest list of dishes possible for a "genteel"
dinner-party of twelve persons, he reluctantly reduced his menu to
soup, fish, eight dishes of meat, stewed celery, spinach, salsify,
and cauliflower. "Potatoes and beets would not be genteel." The meats
were turkey, ham, partridges, mutton chops, sweetbreads, oyster pie,
pheasants, and canvas-back ducks. "Plum-pudding," suggested the hostess.
"La, no, ma'am! All kinds of puddings and pies are out of fashion."
"What, then, can I have at the head and foot of the table?" asked the
hostess. "Forms of ice-cream at the head, and at the foot a handsome
pyramid of fruit. Side dishes, jellies, custards, blanc-mange, cakes,
sweetmeats, and sugar-plums." "No nuts, raisins, figs?" "Oh, _no, no_,
ma'am, they are _quite_ vulgar!"

For the informal supper-parties, to which my aunt was wont to invite
the governor and Mrs. Gilmer, Mr. and Mrs. Southall, Professor and Mrs.
Tucker, the table was amply furnished with cold tongue, ham, broiled
chickens or partridges, and pickled oysters, hot waffles, rolls and
muffins, very thin wheaten wafers, green sweetmeats, preserved peaches,
brandied peaches, cake, tea, and coffee; and in summer the fruits
of the season. These suppers made a brave showing with the Sheffield
candelabra and bowls of roses. Ten years later these "high teas" were
quite out of fashion, and would, by a modern "fashionable caterer," be
condemned as "vulgar." There was a crusade against all card-playing and
dancing. The pendulum was swinging far back from an earlier time when
the punchbowl and cards ruled the evening, and the dancing master held
long sessions, travelling from house to house. To have a regular dancing
party, with violins and cotillon, was like "driving a coach-and-six
straight through the Ten Commandments!" My aunt, however, had the
courage of her convictions, and allowed me small and early dances in
our parlor, with only piano music. Old Jesse Scott lived at the foot of
the hill—but to the length of introducing him and his violin we dared
not go. As it was, after our first offence, a sermon was preached in
the Presbyterian church against the vulgarity and sin of dancing. My
aunt listened respectfully but continued the dance she deemed good for
my health and spirits.

The noblest of men, and one of my uncle's dearest friends, was Thomas
Walker Gilmer, Secretary of the Navy during Tyler's administration.
He was killed on the Potomac by the bursting of a gun on trial for the
first time. My uncle and aunt went immediately to Washington to bring
him home. No man had ever been so loved and esteemed by all who knew
him. I have never seen such grief, as the sorrow of his wife. She had
been a brilliant member of the Washington society, noted for ready wit
and repartee. Never, as long as she lived, did she reënter social life.
With her orphaned children she lived on "The Hill" very near us. These
children were a part of our family always.

As time went on, and we grew tall,—Lizzie and I,—students from the
University found us out, and had permission to visit us. Lizzie,
three years my senior, became engaged to St. George Tucker, one of our
choice circle. When more visitors called on Lizzie than she could well
entertain in an evening, it was her custom to send Susan, a little
pet negress whom she had taught to read, running down the hill with,
"Please, Miss Hargrave, please, ma'am, Miss Lizzie say she certn'ly will
be glad if you let Miss Sara come up an' help 'er with her comp'ny." My
aunt could never deny her anything. I was too young, much too young,
but we took our lives very naturally and unconsciously, accepting a
guest and doing our best for him, whether he was old or young. We were
never announced as débutantes. No Rubicon flowed across our path,—on
one side pinafores and long braids, on the other purple-and-fine-linen
and elaborate coiffure,—the which if stepped across at an entertainment
ushered us into society.

Lizzie and I felt that we were young hostesses, and took pains to be,
according to our lights, ceremonious and conventional in our behavior.
Some one or two of our guests was sure to be George Gordon, or James
Southall, or "Jim" White, or "Sainty" Tucker, who were as brothers to
us; and very watchful and strict were these boy chaperons! The great
anxiety was lest our visitors should stay too late. So my aunt and Mrs.
Gilmer carefully timed the burning of a candle until ten o'clock, and
all candles thereafter were cut that length. When they began to flicker
in the sockets, good nights were expected.

Mrs. Gilmer's large house was divided in the middle by a hall extending
to a door in the rear. On one side were the bedrooms of the family,
on the other the parlors and dining-room. She spent her evenings in a
darkened room, just across the hall from the parlor, and although she
had not the heart to mingle with us, we knew she was near.

One night we had a number of guests, among them a stranger, Mr. Tebbs,
brought by one of our own band who had introduced him and then left, Mr.
Tebbs remarking that he too must soon leave, as a friend was down town
waiting for him. The candles burned low, and we allowed long pauses in
conversation, vainly hoping the stranger would depart. Presently the
knocker sounded an alarum, and little Susan hurried from her mistress's
room to answer it. We distinctly heard her announce, "Dish yer's a
letter, Miss Ann," and Mrs. Gilmer's languid reply, "Light a candle and
read it to me." We essayed to drown Susan's voice, for I was quite sure
it was a peremptory order for me to come home, but it rang out clearly
and deliberately, "Tebbs, you damn rascal! Are you going to stay at Mrs.
Gilmer's all night!" To make matters worse, Susan immediately appeared
with the note for the blushing Mr. Tebbs, who then and there bade us a
long farewell. We never saw him more! A delicious little story was told
with keen relish by Juliet, the fifteen-year-old daughter. She had, as
she thought, "grown up," while her mother lived in seclusion, and had
a boy-lover of her own. Sitting, after hours, one moonlight night on
the veranda under her mother's window, the anxious youth was moved to
seize the propitious moment and declare himself. Juliet wished to answer
correctly, and dismiss him without wounding him. She assured him "Mamma
would never consent." A voice from within decided the matter: "Accept
the young man, Juliet, if you want to—I've not the least objection—and
let him run along home now. Be sure to bolt the door when you come in!"
Evidently Mrs. Gilmer had small respect for boy-lovers; and wished to
go to sleep.

The Gilmer home was full of treasures of books and pictures. We turned
over the great pages of Hogarth and the illustrations of Shakespeare,
very much to the damage of these valuable books. Choice old Madeira
was kept in the cellar, to which we had free access, mixing it with
whipped cream or mingling it with ice, sugar and nutmeg whenever we so
listed. A great gilded frame rested against the wall, from which some
large painting had been removed. Over this we stretched a netting and
inaugurated _tableaux vivantes_, of which we never wearied. I was always
Rowena, to whom Lizzie, as Rebecca the Jewess, gave her jewels. One of
the Gilmer boys made an admirable Dr. Primrose, another Moses, whom we
dressed for the fair, and the other children were flower girls, nuns,
or pilgrims with staff and shell.

When one questions the possibility of this large family living
for several years without a head and moving about decorously and
systematically, we must not forget the family butler, Mandelbert, and
his wife, Mammy Grace. Both were long past middle age. They simply
assumed the care of their broken-hearted mistress and her children,
ruling the house with patient wisdom and kindness. Mammy Grace, so well
known fifty years ago in Virginia, was peculiar in her speech, retaining
the imagery of her race and nothing of its dialect. She was straight
and tall and always carefully dressed. She wore a dark, close-fitting
gown, which she called a "habit," a handkerchief of plaid madras
crossed upon her bosom, an ample checked apron, and a cap with a full
mob crown like Martha Washington's. When she dropped her respectful
"curtsey," her salutation, "Your servant, master," was less suggestive
of deference than of dignified self-respect. Her one fault was that,
like her mistress, she never knew when the children were grown. This
was sometimes embarrassing. As surely as 8 o'clock Saturday night came,
one after the other would be called from the parlor, and would obey
instantly, for fear she would add more than a hint of the thorough,
personally superintended bath which awaited each one.

Mandelbert was superb, tall, gray, and very stately. He had been born
and trained in the family, a model, _distingué_-looking servant. Mammy
Grace lived to an honored old age, but a liberal use of fine old Madeira
proved the reverse of the modern lacteal remedy for old age. In a few
years there was no more wine in the cellar—and no more Mandelbert.

The grandmother of the Gilmer children was Mrs. Ann Baker, a lovely
old lady who wore a Letitia Ramolino turban, with little curls sewn
within its brim. She had been a passenger on James Rumsey's boat in
1786 at Shepherdstown, when he was the first to succeed by steam alone
in propelling a vessel against the current of the Potomac, and "at the
rate of four or five miles an hour!" She was a lovely, cultivated old
lady, the widow of a distinguished man. I cannot be quite sure,—all
witnesses are gone,—but I have a distinct impression I was told that
General Washington was a passenger with Mrs. Baker on James Rumsey's
boat.




CHAPTER IX


The year after my fifteenth birthday was destined to be an eventful
one to me. In May of that year I wrote a letter to my aunt, Mrs.
Izard Bacon Rice, who lived at "The Oaks" in Charlotte County. This
letter, the earliest extant of my girlhood, has recently been placed
in my hands, and I venture to hope I may be pardoned for inserting
the naïve production here; not for any intrinsic merit, but because
of the light it reflects upon my development and associations at the
age of fifteen,—a light not to be acquired by mere recollection, as
a photograph of the person must be more lifelike than a sketch from
memory.

                                     "CHARLOTTESVILLE, May 25, 1845.

     "MY DEAR AUNT: I think that I have fully tested the truth of
     the old saying, viz. 'Hope deferred maketh the heart sick,'
     for I have hoped and hoped in vain for an answer to my last
     letter, and since it does not make its appearance, I write to
     request an explanation.

     "I received a letter from Willie (Carrington) this morning,
     and was rejoiced to hear that you still intend coming to
     Charlottesville 'some of these times,' and that she thinks of
     coming also. I am overjoyed at the idea of seeing my _dear_
     little Henry, and Tom in a few weeks. Willie says that Henry
     is _beautiful_, and that Tom has become quite a famous beau,
     improved wonderfully in gallantry, etc. I anticipate a great
     many long, pleasant walks with him, though I am afraid he will
     not like Charlottesville, as he will find no rabbits' tracks
     or partridges here. I hope you will come the first of June
     and stay a long while with us.

     "Aunt Mary has been very unwell for a long time, but I am in
     hopes that she is getting a little better. I think your visit
     will improve her wonderfully. We are all as busy as we can
     be: aunt and uncle in the garden and yard, and I studying
     my French lessons, sewing, reading, and housekeeping for
     Aunt Mary when she is sick. I am very disconsolate at the
     thought of losing my most intimate friend (Lizzie Gilmer)
     for a few months. She is going to Staunton, and I expect to
     miss her very much. We have a very quiet time now—as most of
     my acquaintances were _sent off_ at the late disturbances at
     the University, and I can study, undisturbed by company. I
     scarcely visit any one except Lizzy, and receive more visits
     from her than any one else, as she comes _every_ day, and
     frequently two or three times a day. I am going to spend my
     last evening with her this evening, as she leaves to-morrow.
     I am very sorry that Willie will not see her, as I know they
     would like each other.

     "Who do you think I have had a visit from? No less a personage
     than Dr. Schéle de Vere, professor of modern languages at the
     University. He has called on me _twice_, but I, unfortunately,
     was not at home once when he called. He is a German (one of
     the nobility), and speaks our language shockingly, and is such
     an incessant _chatterer_ that he gives _me_ no possible chance
     of wedging in a syllable. He walked with me from church last
     Sunday, and jabbered incessantly, much to the amusement of
     the congregation in general, but particularly of two little
     boys who walked behind us. When he parted with us, he asked
     uncle's permission to visit us, which was granted; and he
     seemed _very_ grateful, and said he 'would have de pleasure
     den of sharing de doctor's hospitality and hearing some of
     Miss Rice's fine music.' But what mortifies me beyond measure
     is that he treats me as a _little child_, and inquires _most
     affectionately_ about my progress in music, etc. He is not
     so much older than I am, either, as he is only twenty-one, so
     _I_ think he might be more respectful in his demeanor. What do
     you think of it all? He plays very well on the piano, and has
     heard the best performers in Europe, so I feel very reluctant
     to play for him. The first time he heard me play, he wanted to
     applaud me as they do at concerts, but he was checked by one
     of the company, who intimated to him that it was not customary
     in this country, so he contented himself with clapping his
     hands several times.

     "I have neither time nor paper for much more, so good-by.
     Aunt Mary joins me in love and a kiss to all grandfather's
     household and to Tom, Henry, and Uncle Izard.

                                          "Yours affectionately,
                                                      "SARA A. RICE.

     "P.S. I send my best respects to Lethe, Viny, and Aunt Chany,
     and my love to all the ducks, geese, chickens, turkeys, and
     Tom's dogs.

                                          "Yours affectionately,
                                                     "SARA A. RICE."

This sixty-four-year-old letter was beautifully written with a quill
pen, clear and distinct without an erasure, blotted with sand from
a perforated box, without envelope, and sealed with wax. Written in
figures upon the envelope was "Uncle Sam's" receipt for prepaid postage,
12½ cents, no stamps having then been issued by him.

Fanciful seals and motto wafers were in high favor among romantic young
people. "L'amitié c'est l'amour sans ailes" was a prime favorite; also a
maiden in a shallop looking upward to a star, the legend "Si je te perds
je suis perdu." The most delicate refusal to a lover on record was the
lady's card, "With thanks," sealed with a bird in flight and "Liberty
is sweet!"

The "disturbances of late," for which my friends were "suspended for
a month," were not of a serious nature. They were only the midnight
pranks of mischievous boys, such as hyphenating the livery-stable's name
"Le Tellier" to read "Letel-Liar," drawing his "hacks" to the doors
of the citizens, placing the undertaker's sign over the physician's
office, driving Mr. Schéle's ponies, and leaving on their flanks the
painted words "So far for to-day," the phrase with which he invariably
ended his lectures. It remained later for the student in whom I was
most interested to excel them all. He drove a flock of sheep one dark
night up the rotunda stairs to the platform on the roof, and then shut
down the trap-door. A plaintive good-morning-bleating welcomed faculty
and students next day. Needless to say, the valiant shepherd was
"suspended."

Late in the summer of this year another large convention of clergymen,
Presbyterian this time, was held at Charlottesville. No good hotel
could be found anywhere in Virginia. The landlord was ruined by the
hospitality of the citizens. As soon as a pleasant stranger "put up"
at a public house, he was claimed as a guest by the first man who could
reach him.

When large religious or political or literary meetings convened in
our town, my uncle would send to the chairman asking for the number of
guests we could entertain. Until they arrived, we were as much on the
_qui vive_ as if we had bought numbers in a lottery.

On this occasion, Lizzie and I were in great grief. She had been away
from town for two months, and was now to make me a long visit. We
had made plans for a lovely week. Now the house would be filled with
clergymen,—no music, no visitors (and Lizzie was engaged), no "fun"! My
aunt sympathized with us, and fitted up a small room at the far end of
the hall, moved in the piano and guitar, and bade us make ourselves at
home.

We were seated at church behind a row of the grave and reverend seniors,
when Dr. White leaned over our pew and said to one of them, "I'm glad
to tell you I can send you to Dr. Hargrave's. He will take fine care of
you."

"But," demurred the reverend gentleman, "I have my son with me."

"Take him along! There's plenty of room," replied the doctor.

Lizzie gave me a despairing glance. Now we _are_ ruined, we thought. A
dreadful small boy to be amused and kept out of mischief.

That afternoon we were condoling with each other in our little city of
refuge, when the opening front door revealed among our guests a slender
youth, who, upon being directed to his room, sprang up the stairs two
or three steps at a time.

"Mercy!" said I. "Worse and worse! There's no hope for us! A strange
young man to be entertained in our little parlor!"

My aunt entering just then, we confided our miseries to her. "Never
mind, Lizzie," she said, "Sara shall keep him in the large room. She
must bring down all her prettiest books and pictures and arrange a table
in a corner for his amusement. He will not be here much of the time. He
has to go to church with his father, you know."

The name of this unwelcome intruder was Roger A. Pryor. He made
himself charming. I had not yet tucked up my long braids, but he
treated me beautifully. He was so alert, so witty, so amiable, that
he was unanimously voted the freedom of our sanctum. He entered with
glee into our schemes for self-defence. Running out to a shrub on the
lawn, he returned with a handful of "wax berries," gravely explained,
"ammunition," and proceeded to test the range of the missile. Just then
one of the enemy, the great Dr. Plumer, entered the hall, and the soft
berry neatly reached his dignified nose. His Reverence gave no sign of
intelligence. He had been a boy himself!

St. George Tucker took an immense fancy to our new ally. He found a
great deal to say to me. How glad was I that my aunt had given me a new
rose-colored silk bonnet from Mme. Viglini's.

The week passed like a dream. When the stage drew up at midnight to
take our guest to the railroad, seven miles distant, we were both very
_triste_ at parting.

He was sixteen years old, was to graduate next summer at Hampden Sidney
College, and come the session afterward to our University. I hoped all
would go well with him; and after the winding horn of the stage was
quite out of hearing, I,—well, I had been taught early to entreat the
Father of all to take care of my friends. There could be no great harm
in including him by name, nor yet in adding to my petition the words
"_for me!_"

I suppose I may have seemed a bit _distrait_ after this incident, for
my uncle, who was always devising occupation for me, insisted upon my
writing a story. I liked to please him, and I surprised him by producing
a love story. I think I called it "The Birthnight Ball." I remember this
quotation, which I considered quite delicate and suggestive:—

"The stars, with vain ambition, emulate her eyes." That is all I
remember of my story. My uncle sent it to the _Saturday Evening Post_
in Philadelphia and it was accepted, the editor proposing, as I was a
young writer, to waive the _honorarium_! I was only too glad to accept
the honor.

In the autumn my uncle took us on a long journey to Niagara Falls
and the Northern Lakes. In New York we stopped at the Astor House on
Broadway, and my room looked into the park then opposite, where scarlet
flamingoes gathered around a fountain. We walked in the beautiful
Bowling Green Park, then the fashionable promenade, took tea with
the Miss Bleeckers on Bleecker Street, and bought a lovely set of
turquoises, a jewelled comb, and a white topaz brooch from Tiffany's.
Moreover, my seat at table was near that of John Quincy Adams, now an
aged man, paralytic, and almost incapable of conveying his food to his
lips. He was charmingly cheerful, and courteous to a sweet-faced lady
who attended him.

I think we took the canal-boat in Schenectady which was to convey us
across the state of New York.

My uncle had been beguiled in New York by a flaming pictorial
advertisement of palatial packet-boats, drawn by spirited horses
galloping at full speed. When we entered our little craft, we found
it so crowded that we were wretchedly uncomfortable. Possibly, in our
ignorance, we had not taken the fine packet of the advertisement. Our
own boat crawled along at a snail's pace, making three or four miles
an hour. Many of the passengers left it every morning, preferring to
walk ahead and wait for us until night. We made the journey in five or
six days. The heat, the discomfort, the mosquitoes! Who can imagine the
misery of that journey? Fresh from the mountains and gorgeous sunsets
of Albemarle, we found little to admire in the scenery.

As to the Falls, which we had come so far to see—they and their
_entourage_ made me ill. It was all so weird and strange; the dark
forests of evergreen, pine, and spruce; the sullen Indians, squatted
around blankets, embroidering with beads and porcupine quills; the
hapless little Indian babies strapped to boards and swinging in the
trees, and over all, the heavy roar of the waters. The immensity of
their power filled me with terror. I longed to get away from the awful
spectacle.

The best part of a journey is the home-coming. The dear familiar
house,—we never knew how good it was,—the welcome of affectionate,
cheerful servants; the dogs beside themselves with joy, the perfect
peace, leisure, relaxation! Flowers, fruit, and much accumulated
mail awaited us. My keen eye detected a large-enveloped paper from
Philadelphia, and my nimble fingers quickly abstracted it, unperceived,
from the miscellaneous heap, and consigned it to a bureau drawer in my
room, the key of which went into my pocket.

In the privacy of my bedtime hour—having bolted the door—I drew it
forth. Oh, what inane foolishness! What sad trash! Tearing it into
strips, I lighted each one at my candle and saw the whole burned—burned
to impalpable smoke and degraded dust and ashes; consigned then and
there to utter oblivion!

My uncle often wondered why the story had not appeared. There was a
perilous moment when he threatened to write to the publishers, but I
persuaded him to be patient and dignified about it, and the matter,
after a while, was forgotten. Never was an uncle so managed by a young
girl!

I think my great card with him was my interest in his office work.
Physicians compounded and prepared their own prescriptions sixty-five
years ago. He delighted in me when I donned my ample apron and, armed
with scales and spatula, gravely assumed the airs of a physician's
assistant. I knew all his professional manœuvres to satisfy
hypochondriac old gentlemen and nervous old ladies. I learned to make
the innocuous pills which "helped" them "so much," and the carminative
for the aching little stomachs of the babies. Great have been the
strides since then in the noblest of all professions!

  [Illustration: MRS. FANNY BLAND RANDOLPH.]

Just here I venture to illustrate some of the radical changes in the
practice of medicine by extracts from a letter written by Dr. Theodorick
Bland to his sister, Fanny Bland Randolph. The letter is copied from
the original in the possession of the late Joseph Bryan of Richmond,
Virginia.

The treatment in 1840 differed in no material particular from that of
1771, when Dr. Bland prescribed—regretting the necessity of "absent
treatment"—to his sister's husband, John Randolph, as follows:—

     "I take Mr. Randolph's case to be a bilious intermittent,
     something of the inflammatory kind, which, had he been bled
     pretty plentifully in the beginning, would have intermitted
     perfectly; but unless his pulse is hard and, as it were,
     laboring and strong, I would not advise that he should now be
     bled; but if they are strong and his head-ache violent, and
     the weight of the stomach great, let him lose about six ounces
     of blood from the arm, and if he is much relieved from that,
     and his pulse rises and is full and strong after it, a little
     more may be taken. Let his body be kept open by Glysters, made
     with chicken water, molasses, decoction of marsh-mallows and
     manna, given once, twice or three times,—nay, even four times
     a day if occasion requires, and let him have manna and cream
     of tartar dissolved in Barley Water,—one ounce of manna and a
     half ounce of Cream of Tartar to every pint. Of this let him
     drink plentifully, but prior to this, after bleeding (should
     bleeding be necessary) let him take a vomit of Ipecac, four
     grains every half hour until he has four or five plentiful
     vomits, drinking plentifully of Camomile Tea (to three or four
     pints at intervals) to work it off. Should the pain in the
     head be violent and the eyes red and heavy, let his temples
     be cupped or leeches applied to his temples, which operation
     may be repeated every day, if he find relief from it, for
     two or three days. If the manna, Cream of Tartar and Glysters
     be not effectual, let him take fifteen grains of rhubarb and
     as many of Vitriolated Tartar, repeating the dose, twice or
     three times at six or eight hours intervals. Should he have
     any catching of the nerves, let one of the powders be given
     every four hours in a spoonful of jalop or pennyroyal water.
     Should he be delirious, sleepy, or dozing in a half kind of
     a sleep, his pulse small and quick, put blisters to his back,
     arms and legs, and leeches and cupping to his temples. If his
     skin should be hot, dry and parched after he has taken his
     vomit or before, let him be put in a tub of warm water with
     vinegar in it, up to his arm-pits and continue in it as long
     as he can bear it, first wetting his head therein. He may,
     now and then, drink a little claret-whey and have his tongue
     sponged with sage-tea, honey and vinegar. Dear Fanny, with
     sincere wishes for his safe and speedy recovery, and love to
     him and your dear little ones,

                                     "Your affectionate brother,
                                                         "T. BLAND."

It is difficult to imagine that one of the "dear little ones" was John
Randolph of Roanoke—that incarnation of genius and outrageous temper.
His father survived Dr. Bland's treatment only a few years. Still,
fidelity to historic truth impels me to state that we have no evidence
that the doctor was in league with Henry St. George Tucker, who almost
immediately married the widow!




CHAPTER X


Many of the best types of purely American society could have been found
in the forties in the towns of the country. Now everybody, high and low,
rich and poor, seeks a home in the cities. It is not without reason that
all classes should flock to the metropolis. There wealth can be enjoyed,
poverty aided, talent appreciated; but there individual influence is
almost lost. The temptation to self-assertion, repugnant as it is to
refined feeling, is almost irresistible. Men and women must assert
themselves or sink into oblivion. Nobody has time to climb the rickety
stairs to find the genius in the attic. Nobody looks for the statesman
among the serene adherents to the "Simple Life." Had Cincinnatus lived
at this day, he would have ploughed to the end of his furrow. Nobody
would have interrupted him.

The absence of all the hurry and fever of life made the little town
of Charlottesville an ideal home before the cataclysm of 1861. The
professors at the University could live, in the moderate age, upon
their modest salaries, and have something to spare for entertaining.
The village contingent was refined, amiable, and intelligent. Staunton
sent us, every winter, her young ladies, the daughters of Judge Lucas
Thompson, all of whom were finally absorbed by the descendants of
Charles Carroll, of Carrollton, Maryland. From the neighborhood on the
Buck-mountain Road came the family of William C. Rives, twice our envoy
to the Court of Versailles, and many times sent to the Senate of the
United States. The "gallant Gordons, many a one," the Randolphs and
Pages, and Mr. Stevenson, late Minister to England,—all these lived
near enough to be neighbors and visitors. Across Moore's Creek, at the
foot of Monticello, was the house of Mr. Alexander Rives. There lived
my sweet friend and bridesmaid, Eliza Rives, and there I could call for
a glass of lemonade when on my way to Monticello, guiding, as I often
did, some stranger-guest to visit the home of Thomas Jefferson. We would
pass through the straggling bushes of Scottish broom which bordered the
road—planted originally by Mr. Jefferson himself—pause at the modest
monument over his ashes, and reverently ponder the inscription thereon.
In his own handwriting, among his papers, had been found the record he
desired—not that he had been Minister to France and Secretary of State,
not that he had been twice President of the United States, but simply,—

     "Here lies buried Thomas Jefferson, Author of the Declaration
     of American Independence, of the Statute of Virginia for
     Religious Freedom, and Father of the University of Virginia."

A few steps through the woods would bring us to the plateau commanding
the noble view I have tried to describe. I loved the spot, the glorious
mountains, the glimpse at our feet of the Greek temple in its sacred
grove, the atmosphere of mystery and romance. Once I saw a solitary
_fleur-de-lis_ unfurling its imperial banner on the site of the
abandoned garden. Once I was permitted, in the absence of the owner,
to explore an upper floor in the villa, and was startled by a white,
strained face gleaming out from a dim alcove. This was the bust of
Voltaire. A happy, happy young girl was I on these rides, mounted on my
own horse, Phil Duval, and not unconscious of my becoming green cloth
habit, green velvet turban, and long green feather, fastened with a
diamond buckle—as I believed it to be!

  [Illustration: UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA.]

Young girls reared in a university town and admitted to the friendship
of the professors' families must be dull indeed if they absorb nothing
from the literary atmosphere. My dear aunt was an accomplished English
scholar. Her father had been the friend and neighbor of Patrick
Henry, her husband had been one of John Randolph's physicians. My
close friends, the Gilmers, Southalls, and the daughters of Professor
Harrison, all had brothers who were students, and we strove to keep pace
with these fine young fellows and meet them on English ground at least.

We had no circulating library in Charlottesville, and depended upon
the mails for our current literature. We saw _Graham's Magazine_ from
Philadelphia, the _Home Journal_ from New York, the _Southern Literary
Messenger_ from Richmond. Dickens's novels reached us from London,
issued then in monthly sections, and we impatiently awaited them. "Oh,
Sara, have you been introduced to Mr. Toots?" wrote Maria Gordon; "he
is so much in love with Florence Dombey, he 'feels as if somebody was
a-settin' on him!'"

We liked Dickens better than Walter Scott. We found the remarks of
Captain Clutterbuck and the Rev. Dryasdust hard to bear, barring the
door to the enchanted palace until they had their say. To be sure,
Dickens could be tiresome too, pausing in the middle of an exciting
story while somebody—the "stroller" or the "bagman"—related something
wholly irrelevant. To my mind, a story within a story was a nuisance.
It was like a patch on a garment. The garment might be homespun and the
patch satin, but it was a blemish, nevertheless, something put on to
help a weak place. I skipped these stories then and skip them now!

As to Thackeray, I blush to say we did not appreciate him when he
appeared as "Michael Angelo Titmarsh." But we all knew Becky! She was
only a sublimated little Miss Betsy Stevens, a ragged mountain woman
who sold peaches on a small commission, and who, like Becky, having "no
mamma" or other asset, lived by her wits.

Perhaps in our estimation of Thackeray we were guided somewhat by his
own countrymen. An English paper fell in our hands which was not at all
respectful to "Chawls-Yellowplush-Angelo-Titmarsh-Jeames-William-
Makepeace-Thackeray, Esquire of London Town in old England." Such
ridicule would soon settle him! No man could survive it.

None of the visiting authors deigned to call on us,—Thackeray, Dickens,
Miss Martineau,—all passed us by. True, Frederika Bremer condescended
to spend a night with her compatriot, Mr. Schéle de Vere, _en route_ to
the South, where she was to find little to admire except bananas. Mr.
Schéle invited a choice company to spend the one evening Miss Bremer
granted him. Her novels were extremely popular with us. Every one was
on tiptoe of pleased anticipation. While the waiting company eagerly
expected her, the door opened—not for Miss Bremer, but her companion,
who announced:—

"Miss Bremer, she beg excuse. She _ver_ tired and must sleep! If she
come, she gape in your noses!"

Alas for tourist's help in the translating books! "Face" and "nose,"
"gape" and "yawn," although not synonymic, bear at least a cousinly
relation to each other.

The beautiful Christian custom of lighting a Christmas tree—bringing
"the glory of Lebanon, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box," to
hallow our festival—had not yet obtained in Virginia. We had heard much
of the German Christmas tree, but had never seen one. Lizzie Gilmer, who
was to marry a younger son of the house, was intimate with the Tuckers,
and brought great reports of the preparation of the first Christmas tree
ever seen in Virginia.

I had not yet been allowed to attend the parties of "grown-up" people,
but our young friend John Randolph Tucker was coming of age on Christmas
Eve, and great pressure was brought to bear upon my aunt to permit
me to attend the birthday celebration. This was a memorable occasion.
"Rare Ran Tucker" was a prime favorite with the older set, handsome,
distingué, and already marked for the high place he attained later on
the honor roll of his country.

My aunt could not persist in her rules for me, and I was permitted,
provided I went as "a little girl in a high-necked dress," to accompany
Lizzie. My much-discussed gown was of blue silk, opening over white, and
laced from throat to hem with narrow black velvet! Never, never was girl
as happy! The tree loaded with tiny baskets of bonbons, each enriched
with an original rhyming jest or sentiment, was magnificent, the supper
delicious, the speeches and poems from the two old judges (Tucker) were
apt and witty. I went as a little girl—a close bud—but no "high-necked"
gown ever prisoned a happier heart.

It seems to me, as I look back, that my University friends, Mr. Schéle
de Vere, James Southall, William C. Rives, Jr., George Wythe Randolph,
Roger Pryor, _et al._, felt all at once a very kind interest in my
education. They sent me no end of books. The last presented me with
a gorgeous Shakespeare, also Macaulay's "Essays," Hazlitt's "Age of
Elizabeth" and Leigh Hunt's "Fancy and Imagination," and came himself
to read them to me, along with Shelley, Keats, Byron, and Coleridge.
Mr. Schéle sent me much music and French literature, he also coming to
read the latter with me. William C. Rives loved my music, to which he
could listen by the hour. I kept the friendship of these brilliant men
as long as they lived. Only two lived to be old.

The Tuckers were a family of literary distinction—One of the happiest
and wittiest of them was my dear Lizzie's husband, St. George Tucker.
Anything, everything, would provoke a pun, a parody, or a graceful
rhyme.

When it was proposed to change the name of "Competition"—a court-house
village in the county of Pittsylvania—to "Chatham," he produced a pencil
and paper, and in a moment gave:—

     "Illustrious Pitt, how glorious is thy fame,
     When Competition dies in Chatham's name."

He was a friend of G. P. R. James, whom he once surprised eating a very
"ripe" cheese.

"You see, Tucker, I am, like Samson, slaying my thousands."

"And with the same weapon?" inquired St. George.

We had a delightful addition to our society in Powhatan Starke, who
came from the Eastern Shore, and spent a year first as a guest of
the Southalls, and later of all of us. He seemed to have been created
for the express purpose of making people happy. He would have us all
convulsed with laughter while he held the woollen skeins for my aunt's
knitting. He taught me on the piano waltzes not to be found in the
books; and the polka, a new dance with picturesque figures just then
introduced. He joined in and enhanced every scheme for pleasure, and
would finally spend half the night serenading us. "The serenade,"
according to a recent definition, "is a cherished courtship custom of
primitive societies." Courtship had nothing to do with it in 1847.
It was only a delicate compliment to ladies who had entertained the
serenaders. Four or five voices in unison would sing such songs as "Oft
in the Stilly Night," "The Last Rose of Summer," "Eileen Aroon," "Flow
Gently, Sweet Afton," and one voice render Rizzio's lovely song:—

                 "Queen of my soul whose starlit eyes
                 Are all the light I seek,
                 Whose voice in sweetest melodies
                 Can love or pardon speak;
                   I yield me to thy soft control
                   Mary—Mary—Queen of my soul!
     (_Chorus_) Mary! Mary! Queen of my soul!"

With the first twang of the guitar strings we would slip from our beds,
find our shawls and slippers, and creep downstairs. Crouched close to
the door, we would listen for _Vive l'amour_, the song always concluding
the serenade:—

     "Let every bachelor fill up his glass,
               Vive la Compagnie!
     And drink to the health of his favorite lass,
               Vive la Compagnie!"

And just here, rising as it were to a question of privilege concerning
individual rights, let me solemnly assure my reader that I do not
plagiarize from "Trilby." The low-hanging fruit of Mr. Du Maurier's
bountiful orchard is to be desired to make wise the daughters of Eve,
but this Eve has no occasion to rob it. _Au contraire!_ Powhatan Starke
had brought this song from Paris in the forties and sung it for us
twenty years before, according to Du Maurier, the "genteel Carnegie"
had given it in his hiccupy voice to the Laird, Taffy, Little Billie,
Dodor, Zouzou, and the rest.

Personally, I should like to help myself with both hands to the clever
things the young authors are writing. But I am "proud, tho' poor!"
Besides, I should be found out!" Mon verre n'est pas grand, mais je bois
dans mon verre."

I know, I have heard, but one verse of this immortal song. All the
rest were freshly made, whether at dinner, evening party, or moonlight
serenade, to suit the company and the occasion. The chorus, as rendered
by Carnegie the genteel, was:—

     "Veeverler, Veeverler, veverler vee
             Veverler Companyee."

But my friend twenty years before respected it enough to be accurate:—

     "Vive! Vive! Vive l'amour
     Vive la compagnie!"

Only he, like _les autres_, sometimes dropped his "_r_'s." They were all
nice in their pronunciation. They gave to the broad "_a_" its fullest
due.

     "E'en the slight hahbell raised its head
     Elahstic from her ahry tread!"

exclaimed George Gordon, as one of the maidens tripped across the lawn.
But even he was sometimes indifferent to the rights, as a terminal,
of the letter "_r_"; for only as a terminal does the Southern tongue
utterly scorn it. When but a lisping infant, a possible orator was
drilled in the test words:—

     "Around the rugged rocks
     The ragged rascal ran,"

and taught to roll the elusive consonant to the utmost limit.

But I must linger no longer in this enchanted valley among the
mountains. A long road lies before me. I must pass swiftly on. With just
such trifling events I might fill my book. Dear to every heart are the
annals of its youth; before we enter the vast world of—

     "Effort, and expectation and desire—
     And something evermore about to be."

We cherish the sweet nothings of a happy time as we preserve dried
rose-leaves. Mayhap through their faint fragrance we may dream the rose!

It was a busy time as well as a happy time. I was helping Mrs. William
C. Rives build a church; I was hemstitching all the ruffles for Thomasia
Woodson's trousseau; I was playing waltzes, _ad infinitum_, at the
house-parties in Charlotte—the Henrys and Carringtons—and singing
campaign songs, to the great delight of my dear grandfather, in honor
of my old friend, Henry Clay, whom we were once more trying to make our
President:—

     "Get out o' the way, you're all unlucky;
     Clear the track for old Kentucky!"

(And just here I wish to record the fact that only once in all my life
did my old grandfather ever reprove me. I had committed a flagrant act
of _lèse majestie_. I had put a nightcap on the bust of Patrick Henry!)

But my dear aunt's invitations, written on paper embossed with an
orange-blossom and tied with white satin ribbon, were now issued for my
wedding.

I had begun my acquaintance with the young man known now as "the
General," or "the Judge," by beseeching God to take care of him.
According to my Presbyterian training, I was taught that every prayer
must be followed by efforts for its fulfilment. It was clearly my duty
"to take care of him." He needed it.




CHAPTER XI


Two years after our marriage, my husband was seriously ill from an
affection of the throat, and consulted Dr. Green, an eminent specialist
of Philadelphia. He was ordered to a warmer climate, and forbidden to
speak in or out of court. The tiny law office at a corner of the court
green in Charlottesville was abandoned, and we hastened to Petersburg,
near his birthplace. As it was absolutely impossible for him to exist
without occupation, he purchased a newspaper, sallied forth one morning
to solicit subscribers for "_The South Side Democrat_," and before a
week's end was justified in beginning its issue.

This step determined his career in life. He did not practise law until
he came to New York in 1865.

At the age of twenty-two he became an enthusiastic editor. The little
_South Side Democrat_ soon evinced pluck and spirit. Its youthful editor
sailed his small craft right into the troubled sea of politics, local
and national, to sink or swim according to its merits and the wisdom
of its pilot. It was loved of the gods, with the inevitable result,—but
not until he left it.

  [Illustration: STEPHEN A. DOUGLAS.]

I remember our first meeting with Stephen A. Douglas, so soon to become
a conspicuous figure in our political history. He had just returned from
Europe, and was passing through Petersburg with his first wife (Miss
Martin of North Carolina), and of course glad to talk with the editor
of a Democratic paper, aspiring as he did to the highest office in the
country. He was thirty-nine years old, and below the average height. But
the word _insignificant_ could never have been applied to him. There was
something in his air, his carriage, that forbade it. His massive head,
his resolute face, more than compensated for his short stature.

He has always been accused of rude, unconventional manners. He was
enough of a courtier to inform me that I resembled the Empress Eugénie.

To us he took the trouble to be charming, talked of his European
experience—of everything, in fact, except the perilous stuff burning
in his own bosom, his hunger for the presidency. Like my editor,
he had been admitted to the bar before he had reached his majority.
The parallel was to appear again later. Mr. Douglas also had been a
representative in Congress at thirty.

My husband was a delegate to the Democratic Convention that nominated
Franklin Pierce in 1852, and Mr. Douglas suffered himself to be a
candidate.

The "Little Giant" received at first only 20 votes, but he steadily
increased until Virginia cast her 15 votes for Mr. Pierce, after which
there was "a stampede" which decided the matter. Some writer reminded
Douglas that vaulting ambition overleaps itself, but added dryly,
"Perhaps the little Judge never read Shakespeare and does not think of
this."

An interesting event in Petersburg was a brief visit from Louis Kossuth
_en route_ to the Southern and Western cities, his avowed purpose being
"to invoke the aid of the great American republic to protect his people;
peaceably, if they may, by the moral influence of their declarations;
but forcibly, if they must, by the physical power of their arm—to
prevent any foreign interference in the struggle to be renewed for the
liberties of Hungary."

Our Congress, it will be remembered,[1] had, after Kossuth's defeat
and his detention in Turkey—whither he had fled for refuge—directed
the President to offer one of the ships of our Mediterranean squadron
to bring him and his suite to our country. The Turkish government had
no especial use for Governor Kossuth as a guest or as a captive, and
accordingly he landed from the steamer _Vanderbilt_ which had been sent
with a committee to meet him, at New York quarantine, December 5, 1851,
at one o'clock in the morning. Early as was the hour, a great crowd
collected on shore to greet him. A salute of twenty-one guns and an
address of welcome from the health-officer at once assured him that he
came to us, not to be pitied as a defeated refugee, but to receive all
honor due a conquering hero. As his boat steamed by, Governor's Island
gave him a salute of thirty-one guns, New Jersey one hundred and twenty,
and New York,—but we know how New York can behave! Steamers, great and
small, whistled, pistols and guns were fired, Hungarian cheers were
shouted, and our Stars and Stripes took into close embrace the Hungarian
flag. We know New York hospitality, and her enthusiasm, nay, crazy
excitement when something, anything, novel and interesting happens.

When Kossuth reached Castle Garden, the unhappy mayor essayed in vain to
read his speech. Speech, indeed! A hundred thousand throats were aching
with a speech, and they delivered it with a roar!

"There was," says a reporter, "a continuous roar of cheers like waves on
the shore." Every house was decorated; and as the hero passed, mounted
on Black Warrior, a horse which had borne conquerors in many Florida
and Mexican wars, the street was jammed with enthusiastic people, and
the windows alive with women and children. Never, since the landing of
Lafayette, had New York so abandoned herself to enthusiasm. The story is
too long—of the speeches, processions, dinners, receptions, fire-works,
etc.—to be repeated fully in these pages.

Of course, the little _South Side Democrat_ threw up its cap with the
rest. Kossuth, when he reached the town, had already received honors
of which his wildest fancy never dreamed, and we did our best to echo
them according to our ability. There were several ladies in his suite
to whom I paid my respects (I am not sure his wife was among them), and
the only impression they made upon me was one of extreme weariness. They
spoke English fairly well, but were too utterly worn out to exhibit the
least animation. Kossuth spoke English perfectly. He had a long talk
with my young editor, to whom he gave a huge cigar, which was never
reduced to ashes! But after he left, the _South Side Democrat_ came to
its senses (having never utterly lost them), and expressed a decided
opinion in favor of the non-intervention of this country in the affairs
of Hungary, giving good reasons therefor. Kossuth, when the paper was
handed him, read the editorial carefully, and exclaimed, "_So young_,
and yet so depraved!" adding, with his usual tact, "I mean, of course,
politically!"

But even at this highest pinnacle of glory in New York, when an
editorial banquet was given him at The Astor by George Bancroft, William
Cullen Bryant, Henry J. Raymond, Parke Godwin, Henry Ward Beecher,
Charles A. Dana, and others, Mr. Webster had coldly declined attendance.

His letter was received with hisses and groans. "Kossuth," said Mr.
Webster, in a private letter from Washington, "is a gentleman in
appearance and demeanor, is handsome enough in person, evidently
intellectual and dignified, amiable and graceful in his manners. I shall
treat him with all personal and individual respect; but if he should
speak to me of the policy of 'intervention,' I shall have ears more deaf
than adders'."

The Senate, the President, Congress, all received him cordially. He
dined at the White House; was treated with the utmost distinction, and
a seat of honor assigned him on the floor of the Senate; but before
he left Washington, every one except himself knew that his mission had
failed. He soon discovered it, and appealed no longer for intervention
but for money. He complained bitterly at Pittsburg that he had received
little but costly banquets and foolish parades. The net amount of the
contributions to his cause was less than $100,000, and according to
his statement at Pittsburg, only $30,000 remained for the purchase
of muskets. We had expressed with enthusiasm our appreciation of his
patriotism, courage, and devotion. We had entertained him _en prince_.
We had added a substantial gift. It was not enough.

The citizens of New York very soon calmed down, and by the middle
of January the name of Kossuth was rarely mentioned. When Congress
came to audit his hotel bill, it fairly gasped! The retainers of the
poor refugee had not been poor livers. They had occupied luxurious
apartments, and proved beyond a shadow of doubt the Hungarian
appreciation of old Madeira and champagne. No one, however, could accuse
the hero himself of excess. Still, all at once, he seemed less of a
hero.

One unprejudiced looker-on in Vienna, Ampère, wrote of Kossuth at the
editorial dinner, "He has the bad taste to love fanciful dress, wore a
_lévite_ of black velvet, and seemed to me much less imposing than when
he harangued, leaning upon his sword, in the hall at Castle Garden."
Ampère also philosophizes upon our American enthusiasm,—"the only lively
amusement of the multitude in a country where one has little to amuse
one. It is without consequence and without danger, simply to let out
the steam (_à lâcher la vapeur_), not to cause explosions but to prevent
them."

"The American likes excitement," says Bryce in 'The American
Commonwealth,' "but he is shrewd and keen; his passion seldom obscures
his reason; he keeps his head when a Frenchman, or an Italian, or
even a German, would lose it. Yet he is also of an excitable temper,
with emotions capable of being quickly and strongly stirred. He likes
excitement for its own sake, and goes wherever he can find it."

The Kossuth episode vividly illustrated this! _Sic transit gloria_—be
it prince or patriot!

My young editor had soon to leave the _South Side Democrat_ under the
care of a foster-father. He was summoned to Washington—lured less by
a fine salary than the larger field—to edit with John W. Forney the
_Washington Union_, then the national Democratic organ. It was desired
that one of the two editors should be from the South. Mr. Forney
represented the North.




CHAPTER XII


We had the good fortune to secure pleasant rooms in the large
boarding-house of Mrs. Tully Wise, sister of Henry A. Wise of Virginia.
Mrs. Wise had a number of agreeable people in her house: Professor and
Mrs. Spenser Baird of the Smithsonian Institution; Professor Baird's
assistants,—Mr. Turner, an Englishman, and a Swiss naturalist whom
Professor Baird addressed as "George,"—Mr. James Heth, Commissioner of
Pensions, and his family; Commodore Pennock and his wife, sister of Mrs.
(Admiral) Farragut, and others. I must not forget Miss Dick, whose rooms
were above mine, and who hovered around like the plump, busy little
bird that she was. A long table in the dining-room was filled with "new"
people—desirable possibly, but not known by us. There were the _nouveau
riche_ party from New York, the tall, angular, large-limbed, _passée_
young woman and her fat mamma; there were the well-groomed government
clerk and his stylish young wife; a French count, a German baron; a
physician (Dr. McNalty), and a beautiful dark-eyed young lady who always
wore a camellia in her dusky hair, Miss —well, let her be "Miss Vernon,"
with her father. Lesser lights plenty—a large number in all.

Then Mrs. Wise herself gathered pleasant men and women around her.
In her little parlor we met Dr. Yelverton Garnett, our devoted friend
in all his after life—Mrs. Garnett, daughter of Henry A. Wise, and a
charming young sister, Annie Wise. Our hostess was a widow, well born
and good, who was educating, alone and unaided, five splendid boys, who
lived to reward her by their own worth and success.

We were made thoroughly comfortable, and I soon learned that the "man
behind the gun," to whom it behooved me to be civil, was the head
waiter, Patrick, tall, black, stern, and unyielding. No use in trying
blandishments on Patrick! If one were starved, having overstayed
appointed hours, she must fast until the next meal or find refreshment
elsewhere. I once complained to Mrs. Wise,—that I lost the sweetest
hour in the late afternoon for my stroll on Pennsylvania Avenue; and
represented the perfect ease with which Patrick could keep my tea for
me. She listened with sympathy to the oft-told tale.

"Well, you know, my dear," she said kindly, "Patrick—now you know
Patrick is _so_ good! There's nobody like Patrick! He has some trouble,
with all those strangers to serve. I know you would like to help
Patrick! Yes, to be sure, it would seem to be a simple thing to set
aside a biscuit and bit of cold tongue for you, and keep the kettle
hot on the hearth,—but you see Patrick,—well, he _is_ so good, you'll
not have the heart to trouble him! And dear! I think you will yourself
choose to be indoors early here in Washington."

The one who was "dear" was Mrs. Wise—the noblest and best of women.

Very soon I found that with all these pieces upon the board, a lively
game might be expected. Miss Dick, whose brother was employed by the
government, soon enlightened me: the rich New York girl wanted a title.
She was "trying to catch" the baron, and would succeed, "as nobody else
wanted either of them." Miss Vernon was dying for love of Dr. McNalty.
She was going into a decline. Probably the doctor was ignorant of the
state of things. Such a beautiful girl—a perfect lady! Somebody ought
to speak to the doctor. She, (Miss Dick) couldn't. Nobody would listen
to an old maid—"perhaps _you_, Mrs. Pryor"—("Oh, mercy, no")—well, then,
poor girl! The French count was flirting with the wife of the government
clerk. Her husband would find _her_ out, never fear! There was danger
of a hostile meeting before the winter was over. Then that hateful old
Dr. Todkin, with his straw-colored wig! To be sure, she and some others
liked the parlors kept dark—but what business had he to say he hoped
some lady would come who "liked the light and _could bear the light_!"
Such Dutch impertinence!

I received these confidences of Miss Dick in my own rooms, for I soon
learned, with Mrs. Baird and Mrs. Heth, that the public drawing-room
was no place for me.

"Gossip!" said they. "It has gone beyond gossip! The air is thick with
something worse. You might cut it with a knife."

But it was not long before we had a ripple in our own calm waters.
On one side of me at our round table sat Mr. George, the eccentric,
small, intense Swiss naturalist, who amused me much by affecting to be
a woman-hater.

"Not that they concern me," he said, "but,—well, I find fishes more
interesting. I understand them better."

Beside my husband was placed our special pet, Maria Heth, taken under
our wing in the absence of her parents, neither of whom ever appeared.
The circle was completed by Professor and Mrs. Baird, little Lucy Baird,
and Mr. Turner. In course of time my right-hand man fell into silence,
broken by long-drawn sighs. I supposed he had lost a "specimen," or
failed to find enough bones in some fish he was to classify, or maybe
heard bad news from home, or belike had a toothache; so, after a few
essays on my part to encourage him, I let him alone. Presently his place
at the board was vacant. Things went on in this way until one morning,
early, Maria Heth knocked at my door.

"I am troubled about Mr. George," she said. "I am sorry to worry you,
but I'm afraid there's no help for it. Mamma is too nervous to hear
unpleasant things, and I'm afraid of exciting papa."

"Come to the point, Maria! Mr. George, you say! Well, then, what about
Mr. George?"

"Well, you know he's been missing nearly a week. It was no business of
mine. I had no dream _I_ had anything to do with it. But see what he
has written me! 'This comes to you from a broken-hearted man. _Forget
him!_ You will meet him no more on earth. Perhaps—_yonder!_ George.'"

Questioning Maria further, she confessed that on the day Mr. George
disappeared, she received from him a passionate love-letter. She had
answered him curtly. Yes,—she certainly had told him what she thought
of his impertinence. "Of course, I am distressed, but what could I
do," said the poor child. "You know my brother! Richard would have been
enraged. I had to settle him once for all to save trouble."

I went immediately to Mrs. Baird with my information. She, too, had
become anxious at the sudden disappearance of the young naturalist. He
had not been seen at the Institution, and investigation revealed the
fact that he had not occupied his rooms. Professor Baird was deeply
concerned, and a vigorous search was made for the missing man.

Upon returning from my walk that evening, I found a note on my table
from Mrs. Baird. The runaway had been found. It would be unnecessary
to drag the river or notify the police. He was discovered in the upper
chamber of an humble lodging-house, very limp and penitent, but "clothed
and in his right mind." He had not been drinking, he had not been in
the river. I never knew what Professor Baird did to him—pulled him
out of bed, very likely, and shook him into his senses. So we lost Mr.
George (whose surname I dare not reveal), and he was doubtless mightily
strengthened in his opinion of women—not to be understood by him and
not, by any means, comparable to fishes.

Perhaps I should not leave the _dramatis personæ_ of our boarding-house
"in the air." Before I left Mrs. Wise, the baron was safely moored into
harbor by the tall young lady from New York. The government clerk had
openly insulted the French count, and it was supposed a challenge had
passed between them. Evidently nothing had come of it. If they fought,
it was a bloodless battle. The exquisite Miss Vernon had reappeared,
thinner, paler, but radiant and beautiful exceedingly. Miss Dick
was puzzled. Perhaps the girl had "gotten over it," like a sensible
woman. Perhaps she had not been ill at all—only hysterical. It was not
impossible she might have feigned illness "to bring him around." These
were some of the solutions of the problem that occurred to Miss Dick.

I could have enlightened her. One evening, Dr. McNalty, whom I knew
but slightly, spoke to me in the hall. He had a soft white parcel in
his hand and seemed embarrassed and agitated. He begged me to do him a
great kindness—would I see Miss Vernon—not send a messenger, see her
myself and give her some camellias from him. Possibly there might be
some message from her. He would await my return.

Would I? I flew on the wings of hope and keen interest. I comprehended
the situation. Of course there had been a misunderstanding. Possibly
his letters had been returned and unopened. Only a desperate necessity
could have nerved him to appeal to me—almost a stranger. I rose to the
occasion, and when I was admitted to Miss Vernon's room, I was prepared
to be an eloquent advocate, should circumstances encourage and justify
me.

When I returned to Dr. McNalty, I bore a message. She had laid the
camellias against her lovely cheek and said, "Tell him his flowers are
whispering to me."

I hope my reader will appreciate my reticence in ending this little
story just here. If, as Talleyrand declared, "a man who suppresses
a _bon mot_ deserves canonization," is there no nimbus for the woman
who, for truth's sake, suppresses the _dénouement_ of a love story? The
temptation is great to amplify a little, embroider a little—but then I
should have to reckon with my conscience, with the certainty of being
worsted.

As a matter of fact, I know only this of the young woman I am
constrained to call Miss Vernon. Her true name was one well and
honorably known in history. She was the most beautiful of all
dark-eyed women I have ever known—of course the blue-eyed angels are
exceptional—and her manners and attire were as elegant as her person.
She wore rich velvet, then much in vogue, and only one jewel:—

     "On her fair breast a sparkling cross she wore
     Which Jews might kiss and infidels adore."

I never knew the end of the romance in which I bore a small part. I
never even knew of what whisperings camellias are capable. Had they been
violets—or roses, or lilies of the valley—but big white camellias! I
only know she recovered and that Dr. McNalty thanked me warmly for my
small service. That is all.




CHAPTER XIII


Mr. Fillmore was a fine type of the kind of man Americans love to raise
to the highest office in their gift. He had not been a mill boy, nor
lived in a log-cabin, nor split rails (which was to his discredit),
but he had been an apprentice to a wool-carder in Livingston County,
New York. Afterward he had worked in a lawyer's office all day and
studied at night. He had had no patron. He was essentially a self-made
man. When, by the death of President Taylor, he became President of
the United States, he fitted into the place as if he had made himself
expressly for it.

According to Ampère, who observed us so narrowly in 1852, "M. Fillmore
avait un cachet de simplicité digne et bienveillante, qui me semble
faire de lui le type de ce que doit être un président Américain."

But nobody said any of those fine things about dear Mrs. Fillmore. The
_cachet de simplicité_ she certainly possessed, but she wore it with
a difference. In a President it was admirable, in a beautiful woman it
would have been adorable. It stamped plain, unhandsome, ungraceful Mrs.
Fillmore as ordinary, commonplace. She was the soul of kindness. "She
has no manner," said a woman of fashion. "She is absolutely simple. It
is not good form to be so motherly to her guests. Why, what do you think
she said to me at the last levee? 'You look pale and ill, my dear! Pray
find a seat.' Think of that! Haven't I a right to look pale and ill, I
wonder!"

"She meant to be kind," I ventured. "Should she have permitted you to
faint on the floor?"

"Kind, indeed! It was her duty, if she thought me 'gone off in my
looks,' to tell me how _well_ I was looking! I should have been all
right after that. As it was, I came straight home and went to bed."

I fairly revelled in the music I could now hear. From a famous musician,
Mr. Palmer, I took lessons again. He was a notable character—a splendid
musician, and a welcome guest at Mr. Corcoran's and other houses, where
he amused the company with tricks of legerdemain. He afterward became
the celebrated "Heller," the prince of legerdemain and clairvoyance.
The elder Booth, Hackett, and Anna Cora Mowatt introduced me to the
fascinations of the stage. Nothing to my mind had ever been, could ever
be, finer than their Hamlet, Falstaff, and Parthenia. The Armstrongs
gave me _carte blanche_ to their box at the theatre, and I saw
everything. I wonder if any one at the present day remembers the Ravel
brothers and their matchless pantomimes! Mrs. Baird made a party, taking
little Lucy to see "Jocko." Not a word was spoken in the play; not an
eye was dry in the house.

One evening an agreeable Frenchman whom we knew joined us in our box,
and seeking an opportunity, whispered to me, "Madame, will you grant me
a favor? There—in the parquette, second from the front, _voyez-vous?_
A lady _en chapeau bleu_?"

"Yes, yes, I see! Who is she?"

"Madame" (tragically), "that _demoiselle_ with the young man is
_fiancée_ to my friend!"

"And you are perhaps jealous!"

"Ah, _mais non_, Madame! I have this moment said to my friend,
'_Regardez votre fiancée_.' He has responded, '_C'est vrai!_ It is
custom of this country.'"

"And what then?" I asked.

"Oh!" shrugging his shoulders in scorn not to be expressed in words, "I
say, '_Eh bien, Emil_. If _you_ satisfy, _I_ very well satisfy!' But,
pardon, Madame, is it _convenable_ in this country for _demoiselle_ to
appear at theatre with young gentleman without chaperon?"

I found refuge in ignorance: "I am sure I cannot say. You see I am from
Virginia. I haven't been long in Washington, and customs here may differ
from manners in my home."

I was a proud woman when Mr. Pierce sent for my young editor to read
with him his inaugural address. These were mighty political secrets,
not to be shared with Miss Dick, and thus published to her little
boarding-house world. I felt that I belonged, not to that nor to any
other small world. I belonged to the nation; and strange to say, that
impression (or must I say delusion?) never left me in my darkest, most
obscure days.

Mr. Pierce liked my young editor. We adored _him_! Only since we
lost him have we learned of his many mistakes, vacillation, weakness,
unpopularity; nothing of these appeared in 1852. He had been a fine
politician, had served his country "with bravery and credit," enlisting
as a private in the Mexican War. "His integrity was above suspicion,
and he was deeply religious." It is quite certain he did not desire the
nomination. There was nobody in his family to exult over his promotion,
no son, no daughter to blossom with new beauty because of the splendid
stem on which she grew. Only a sick, broken-hearted wife, too feeble to
endure the exactions of social life, too sad to take part in anything
outside her own room. She did not even attempt it. It was at once
understood that our republican court was such only in name. In name only
did Mrs. Pierce appear in its annals. I never saw her. I never saw any
one who had seen her. We thought of her as a Mater Dolorosa, shrouded
in deepest mourning, and we gave her a sacred place in our hearts.

I cannot close my records of this, my earliest experience of Washington
life, without remembering with gratitude all I owe to the friendship
and wisdom of the discreet, cultured women who felt an early interest in
me, guiding and instructing me. Mrs. Spenser Baird, Mrs. Garnett(_née_
Wise), lovely Annie Wise, and Maria Heth, these were my intimate
friends. Mrs. Garnett, a lovely Christian woman, watched me closely
and restrained me in my natural desire for beautiful raiment. I once
confessed to her, almost with tears, that Léonide Delarue had beguiled
me into giving forty dollars for a bonnet, whereupon she produced
pencil and paper and proved that the material (exclusive of a bit of
superfluous point-lace) could be obtained for ten dollars. The young
English queen, it was said, could make her own bonnets. But I could
not succeed as a milliner. I had some talent, but not in that line.
However, that I might please and surprise Mrs. Garnett and also imitate
the Queen, when the time came for me to indulge myself in a winter
bonnet (we did not call them hats—they weren't hats!), I essayed the
"creation" of one with velvet, satin, and feathers galore. It was a
dreadful failure! I took it to Madame Delarue's and begged her to tell
me what ailed it.

"_Mon Dieu!_" she exclaimed, throwing up her hands in despair,
"_pesante_."

I gave away my "creation" to somebody in my service—anybody who would
condescend to accept it. Mrs. Garnett felt I could hardly afford to try
again. She knew, however, how important to me as a young politician's
wife would be the virtue of economy. It is not written in the stars
that an honest politician can ever be rich. A great evening reception
was to be given by some magnate at which my young editor consented to
be present. He secretly visited Harper's fine store and brought home a
lovely "bertha" for me made of three rows of point-lace. I gasped! But
I was prudent. I accepted it with apparent pleasure, went to Harper's,
found it had been charged, and effected its return. But here was a
dilemma. I was to attend the reception. I was to wear evening dress and
a beautiful "bertha."

"Have you not imitation lace?" I inquired.

Harper had,—and the imitation was good,—the price of plenty of it ten
dollars. I guiltily made the exchange, took a searching look at my
model, and perfectly copied it.

That evening, brave in my counterfeit presentment I stood under a blaze
of light with my intimates, Mrs. Clay, Mrs. Fitzpatrick, and others
around me. My editor approached and was complimented upon my appearance.
"Ah, but," he said, in the pride of his young heart, "if I can only keep
it up! Why, Mrs. Clay, that bit of lace cost me hundreds of dollars!" I
caught the wondering eyes of my fully instructed friends, gave them an
imploring glance—and when the boastful young fellow departed, told them
my story. They said I was a very silly woman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Fillmore's tastes had been sufficiently ripened to enable him to
gather around him men of literary taste and attainment. John P. Kennedy,
a man of elegant accomplishments, was Secretary of the Navy. Washington
Irving was often Mr. Kennedy's guest. We knew these men, and among them
none was brighter, wittier, or more genial than G. P. R. James, the
English novelist whose star rose and set before 1860. He was the most
prolific of writers, "Like an endless chain of buckets in a well," said
one; "as fast as one is emptied, up comes another."

We were very fond of Mr. James. One day he dashed in, much excited:—

"Have you seen the _Intelligencer_? By George, it's all true! Six times
has my hero, a 'solitary horseman,' emerged from a wood! My word! I
was totally unconscious of it! Fancy it! Six times! Well, it's all up
with that fellow. He has got to dismount and enter on foot—a beggar, or
burglar, or pedler, or at best a mendicant friar."

"But," suggested one, "he might drive, mightn't he?"

"Impossible!" said Mr. James. "Imagine a hero in a gig or a curricle!"

"Perhaps," said one, "the word 'solitary' has given offence. Americans
dislike exclusiveness. They are sensitive, you see, and look out for
snobs."

He made himself very merry over it; but the solitary horseman appeared
no more in the few novels he was yet to write.

One day, after a pleasant visit from Mr. James and his wife, I
accompanied them at parting to the front door, and found some difficulty
in turning the bolt. He offered to assist, but I said no—he was not
supposed to understand the mystery of an American front door.

Having occasion a few minutes afterward to open the door for another
departing guest, there on his knees outside was Mr. James, who
laughingly explained that he had left his wife at the corner, and had
come back to investigate that mystery. "Perhaps you will tell me," he
added, and was much amused to learn that the American door opened of
itself to an incoming guest, but positively refused, without coaxing,
to let him out. "By George, that's fine!" he said, "that'll please the
critics in my next." I never knew whether it was admitted, for I must
confess that, even with the stimulus of his presence, his books were
dreary reading to my uninstructed taste.

A very lovely and charming actress was prominent in Washington society
at this time,—the daughter of an old New York family, Anna Cora (Ogden)
Mowatt. She was especially interesting to Virginians, for she had
captivated Foushee Ritchie, soon afterward my husband's partner on the
editorship of the _Richmond Enquirer_. Mr. Ritchie, a confirmed old
bachelor, had been fascinated by Mrs. Mowatt's Parthenia (in "Ingomar"),
and was now engaged to her. He proudly brought to me a pair of velvet
slippers she had embroidered for him, working around them as a border
a quotation from "Ingomar":—

     "Two souls with but a single thought,
     Two hearts that beat as one."




CHAPTER XIV


I was peacefully enjoying a cup of tea with Mrs. Arnold Harris, when her
father, old General Armstrong, entered, and brought me the astounding
news that my husband had resigned his position as editor of the
_Washington Union_.

"Oh, that boy! He thinks he knows more about foreign politics than I do."

I was very fond of the General, who had always treated me in a fatherly
and most kind manner. But of course I could not hear my husband
discussed, even by him, so I expressed polite regrets and hastened
home. It was too true! The junior partner had published in the _Union_
a very strong article, taking the part of Russia in the Crimean War,
and General Armstrong had wished him to disavow it "upon further
consideration." He had refused, and declared he must write according
to his convictions or not at all. The matter might possibly have
been adjusted, had not the General, with more zeal than discretion,
remonstrated with him upon the ground that he should "think twice before
giving up a large salary."

There is a very ugly word in the English language of which I, as a
child, stood in mortal fear. I had then never read that word anywhere
except in the Bible or my Catechism. I had never heard it except in the
pulpit. I had an idea that the devil, in whose personality I believed,
but of whom I had never thought enough to be afraid, might appear at any
moment in connection with that inviting word, if uttered out of church.

Only lately has it been shorn of its terrors by being left out root and
branch in the revision of the Bible. Now, although offensive to ears
polite, it is no longer supposed to imperil the safety of the soul.
Unless refined taste forbids, it may in seasons of peculiar vexation of
spirit—_à lâcher la vapeur_—be applied to things inanimate: to a "spot"
that will not "out," to tiresome "iteration," to "faint praise," or,
on general principles, suitably preface the pronoun "it," but never to
living individuals! That would be uncivil to a degree—highly imprudent,
and likely to result unpleasantly. There can be no doubt of the fact
that it contains certain mysterious elements of relief and comfort, else
why its frequent use by men and not infrequent use by some women?

At the time of which I am writing it was to me still a desperate word of
evil source and evil omen. Even now the cells of my brain respond with
a shudder when I hear it.

You can then imagine the shock I sustained when I learned my husband's
reply to the good old General's overture.

"What did you say?" I had sternly demanded.

"Well, if you _will_ have it—I said, '_damn_ the money!'"

We did not leave Washington immediately. My editor knew he could make
good his position in regard to Russia in her quarrel with England, and
Mr. Gales offered him the columns of the _National Intelligencer_ for
that purpose. He wrote a long and able defence of Russia. Caleb Cushing
met him afterward and congratulated him on an article which was, he
said, "unanswered and unanswerable."

He was fascinated with editorial life, immediately bought an interest in
the _Richmond Enquirer_, and became co-editor with William F. Ritchie.
We had inaugurated President Pierce, whose friendship promised much. I
had made charming friends in Washington,—Mrs. Gales and Mrs. Seaton,
Mrs. Crittenden, beautiful Adele Cutts (afterward Mrs. Douglas),
Mrs. "Clem" Clay, and other charming wives of the representatives in
Congress. But I was not sorry to leave the city. My dear Blue Mountains
were awaiting me. For years I could never return to them without a
swelling heart. I was going back for a long visit to my aunt and the
baby girl I had lent her (to keep her own dear heart from breaking
when I left her), and I had a splendid boy to show my friends in
Charlottesville—the old people only—for all my confrères had married
and taken wing.

It was not long before Mr. Pierce sent my husband on a special mission
to Greece. I could not accompany him. I could not travel with my
babies—there were now three—nor could I leave them with my delicate
aunt. I went with him as far as Washington, where we spent one day and
night. A dinner had been arranged to witness the unfolding of a superb
specimen of the _Agave Americana_, supposed to be over fifty years
old, and which now, for the first time in the memory of the present
generation, had suddenly thrown up a great stalk crowned with a bud
nearly a foot long.

We did not attend the dinner, but at midnight, upon answering a knock
at the door, there stood a man bearing in his arms the splendid flower.
A thick fringe of narrow, pure white petals formed a rosette, and from
the centre rose a plume of golden stamens. I was resolved this midnight
beauty should not discover the dawn which signals the closing of its
petals, so I placed it in the ample fireplace, made a framework of
canes, parasols, and umbrellas around it and covered the whole with a
blanket. In the morning I peeped in. It presented a tightly twisted
spike, having entered upon another long sleep of fifty years, more
or less. It was this flower that my husband, with outrageous American
boasting, described to Queen Mathilde of Greece as an ordinary floral
production of this country, not to be confounded with the commonplace
night-blooming Cereus, and fired an ambition in her soul that could
hardly have been gratified.

While my husband was absent on his mission, President Pierce spent one
day in Charlottesville to visit the tomb and home of Jefferson, the
father of his political party. We were then at my aunt's country place,
and the President wrote to me regretting he could not go out to see me,
and inviting me to spend the one evening of his stay with him and a few
friends at his hotel.

I had a delightful evening. He expressed the warmest friendship for
the young ambassador to Greece, and presented me with two beautiful
books, bound sumptuously in green morocco and inscribed in his own fine
handwriting, from my "friend Franklin Pierce." Those valued books were
taken from me when our house was sacked in 1865. They possibly exist
somewhere! certainly in the grateful memory of their first owner.

The President had the courtesy to express pleasure in my piano playing.
I made him listen to Thalberg's "La Stranièra," Henselt's "Gondola,"
and "L'Elisir d'Amour"; and I left him with an impression that has never
been lost, of his kindness of heart, his captivating voice and manner.

My husband's letters from Greece and from Egypt were extremely
interesting, and I preserved them for publication in book form. Alas!
they, too, were lost in 1865. Unable to encumber myself when I fled
before the bullets in 1865, I sent my little son back under cover of
night to draw the box containing them to some safe place away from the
buildings and burn them. Thus I lost all records of our active life
in Virginia before the eve of surrender, except those preserved in the
files of Northern papers.

Passage was taken in the _Pacific_ for my husband's return, and I went
down to Petersburg that I might be with his family to meet him. The
_Pacific_ was long overdue before we would acknowledge to each other
that we were anxious,—I can hear now, as then, cries of the newsboys,
"Here's the _New York Herald_, and no news of the _Pacific_,"—repeating
like a knell of despair, as they ran down the streets, "_No news of the
Pacific! No news of the Pacific!_" At last, when the strain was almost
unbearable, my father, Dr. Pryor, ran home with the paper in his hand:
"A printed list of the passengers, my dear! Roger's name is not among
them!"

It had pleased God to deliver him. He had taken passage on the _Pacific_
and sent his baggage ahead of him. When he reached Marseilles, he
found his trunks and packages had been opened,—a discourtesy to an
ambassador,—and he remained a few days to obtain redress, allowing the
_Pacific_ to sail without him. That ill-starred steamer never reached
home. The story of her fate is held where so many secrets, so many
treasures lie—in the bosom of the great deep.

I have told elsewhere something of my husband's residence at Athens. It
suffices to state here that he accomplished the object of his mission to
the satisfaction of his government, and to his own pleasure and profit.
He brought me many beautiful pictures and carvings for the home we now
made in Richmond, to say nothing of corals, amber, mosaics, curios, and
antiques, silks, laces, velvets, perfumes, etc., to my great content.
Soon after his return, the President offered him the mission to Persia,
which he declined. We found a pleasant house in Richmond, with ample
grounds on either side for the flowers I adored. T There we set up our
Lares and Penates—happy housekeepers, intent on hospitality.